10.3 Representing rooted trees

Linked lists work well for representing linear relationships, but not all
relationships are linear. In this section, we look specifically at the
problem of representing rooted trees by linked data structures. We first
look at binary trees, and then we present a method for rooted trees in
which nodes can have an arbitrary number of children.

We represent each node of a tree by an object. As with linked lists,

we assume that each node contains a key attribute. The remaining

attributes of interest are pointers to other nodes, and they vary
according to the type of tree.

Binary trees

Figure 10.6 shows how to use the attributes p, left, and right to store

pointers to the parent, left child, and right child of each node in a

binary tree T. If x.p = NIL, then x is the root. If node x has no left
child, then x.left = NIL, and similarly for the right child. The root of the
entire tree T is pointed to by the attribute T.root. If T.root = NIL, then

the tree is empty.

Rooted trees with unbounded branching

It's simple to extend the scheme for representing a binary tree to any
class of trees in which the number of children of each node is at most

some constant k: replace the left and right attributes by child1, child2,
... , childk. This scheme no longer works when the number of children

of a node is unbounded, however, since we do not know how many

attributes to allocate in advance. Moreover, if k, the number of children,

is bounded by a large constant but most nodes have a small number of
children, we may waste a lot of memory.

Fortunately, there is a clever scheme to represent trees with arbitrary

numbers of children. It has the advantage of using only O(n) space for
any n-node rooted tree. The left-child, right-sibling representation

appears in Figure 10.7. As before, each node contains a parent pointer

p, and T.root points to the root of tree T. Instead of having a pointer to
each of its children, however, each node x has only two pointers:

1. x.left-child points to the leftmost child of node x, and

2. x.right-sibling points to the sibling of x immediately to its right.

If node x has no children, then x.left-child = NIL, and if node x is the
rightmost child of its parent, then x.right-sibling = NIL.

Figure 10.6 The representation of a binary tree T. Each node x has the attributes x.p (top),
x.left (lower left), and x.right (lower right). The key attributes are not shown.

Figure 10.7 The left-child, right-sibling representation of a tree T. Each node x has attributes
x.p (top), x.left-child (lower left), and x.right-sibling (lower right). The key attributes are not

shown.

Other tree representations

We sometimes represent rooted trees in other ways. In Chapter 6, for
example, we represented a heap, which is based on a complete binary
tree, by a single array along with an attribute giving the index of the last
node in the heap. The trees that appear in Chapter 19 are traversed
only toward the root, and so only the parent pointers are present: there
are no pointers to children. Many other schemes are possible. Which
scheme is best depends on the application.

Exercises

10.3-1

Draw the binary tree rooted at index 6 that is represented by the
following attributes:

index key left right

1 17 8 9
2 14 NIL NIL
3 12 NIL NIL
4 20 10 NIL
5 33 2 NIL
6 15 1 4
7 28 NIL NIL
8 22 NIL NIL
9 13 3 7
10 25 NIL 5

10.3-2
Write an O(n)-time recursive procedure that, given an n-node binary

tree, prints out the key of each node in the tree.

10.3-3
Write an O(n)-time nonrecursive procedure that, given an n-node

binary tree, prints out the key of each node in the tree. Use a stack as
an auxiliary data structure.

10.3-4
Write an O(n)-time procedure that prints out all the keys of an
arbitrary rooted tree with n nodes, where the tree is stored using the

left-child, right-sibling representation.

10.3-5
Write an O(n)-time nonrecursive procedure that, given an n-node

binary tree, prints out the key of each node. Use no more than constant
extra space outside of the tree itself and do not modify the tree, even
temporarily, during the procedure.

10.3-6

The left-child, right-sibling representation of an arbitrary rooted tree

uses three pointers in each node: left-child, right-sibling, and parent.

From any node, its parent can be accessed in constant time and all its
children can be accessed in time linear in the number of children. Show

how to use only two pointers and one boolean value in each node x so
that x's parent or all of x's children can be accessed in time linear in the
number of x's children.

Problems

10-1 Comparisons among lists

For each of the four types of lists in the following table, what is the
asymptotic worst-case running time for each dynamic-set operation
listed?

unsorted, sorted, unsorted, sorted,
singly linked singly doubly linked doubly
linked linked
SEARCH
INSERT
DELETE
SUCCESSOR
PREDECESSOR

MINIMUM
MAXIMUM

10-2 Mergeable heaps using linked lists
A mergeable heap supports the following operations: MAKE-HEAP

(which creates an empty mergeable heap), INSERT, MINIMUM,
EXTRACT-MIN, and UNION.1 Show how to implement mergeable
heaps using linked lists in each of the following cases. Try to make each
operation as efficient as possible. Analyze the running time of each
operation in terms of the size of the dynamic set(s) being operated on.

a. Lists are sorted.

b. Lists are unsorted.

c. Lists are unsorted, and dynamic sets to be merged are disjoint.

10-3 Searching a sorted compact list

We can represent a singly linked list with two arrays, key and next.
Given the index i of an element, its value is stored in key[i], and the
index of its successor is given by next[i], where next[i] = NIL for the last
element. We also need the index head of the first element in the list. An

n-element list stored in this way is compact if it is stored only in
positions 1 through n of the key and next arrays.

Let's assume that all keys are distinct and that the compact list is

also sorted, that is, key[i] < key[next[i]] for all i = 1, 2, ... , n such that
next[i] NIL. Under these assumptions, you will show that the

randomized algorithm COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH searches the list for

key k in expected time.

COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH(key, next, head, n, k)

1i = head
2while i NIL and key[i] < k
3 j = RANDOM(1, n)
4 if key[i] < key[j] and key[j] k

5 i=j

6 if key[i] == k

7 return i

8 i = next[i]

9if i == NIL or key[i] > k

10 return NIL

11else return i

If you ignore lines 37 of the procedure, you can see that it's an

ordinary algorithm for searching a sorted linked list, in which index i

points to each position of the list in turn. The search terminates once

the index i "falls off " the end of the list or once key[i] k. In the latter
case, if key[i] = k, the procedure has found a key with the value k. If,
however, key[i] > k, then the search will never find a key with the value
k, so that terminating the search was the correct action.

Lines 37 attempt to skip ahead to a randomly chosen position j.
Such a skip helps if key[j] is larger than key[i] and no larger than k. In
such a case, j marks a position in the list that i would reach during an

ordinary list search. Because the list is compact, we know that any

choice of j between 1 and n indexes some element in the list.

Instead of analyzing the performance of COMPACT-LIST-

SEARCH directly, you will analyze a related algorithm, COMPACT-

LIST-SEARCH, which executes two separate loops. This algorithm

takes an additional parameter t, which specifies an upper bound on the

number of iterations of the first loop.

COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH (key, next, head, n, k, t)

1i = head

2for q = 1 to t

3 j = RANDOM(1, n)

4 if key[i] < key[j] and key[j] k

5 i=j

6 if key[i] == k

7 return i

8while i NIL and key[i] < k

9 i = next[i]
10if i == NIL or key[i] > k

11 return NIL

12else return i

To compare the execution of the two algorithms, assume that the

sequence of calls of RANDOM(1, n) yields the same sequence of

integers for both algorithms.

a. Argue that for any value of t, COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH(key, next,
head, n, k) and COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH (key, next, head, n, k, t)

return the same result and that the number of iterations of the while
loop of lines 28 in COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH is at most the total

number of iterations of both the for and while loops in COMPACT-
LIST-SEARCH.

In the call COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH (key, next, head, n, k, t), let Xt

be the random variable that describes the distance in the linked list (that

is, through the chain of next pointers) from position i to the desired key
k after t iterations of the for loop of lines 27 have occurred.

b. Argue that COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH (key, next, head, n, k, t) has
an expected running time of O(t + E [Xt]).

c. Show that . (Hint: Use equation (C.28) on page

1193.)

d. Show that . (Hint: Use inequality (A.18) on page

1150.)

e. Prove that E [Xt] n/(t + 1).

f. Show that COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH (key, next, head, n, k, t) has
an expected running time of O(t + n/t).

g. Conclude that COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH runs in expected

time.

h. Why do we assume that all keys are distinct in COMPACT-LIST-

SEARCH? Argue that random skips do not necessarily help
asymptotically when the list contains repeated key values.

Chapter notes

Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [6] and Knuth [259] are excellent references
for elementary data structures. Many other texts cover both basic data
structures and their implementation in a particular programming
language. Examples of these types of textbooks include Goodrich and
Tamassia [196], Main [311], Shaffer [406], and Weiss [452, 453, 454]. The
book by Gonnet and Baeza-Yates [193] provides experimental data on
the performance of many data-structure operations.

The origin of stacks and queues as data structures in computer
science is unclear, since corresponding notions already existed in
mathematics and paper-based business practices before the
introduction of digital computers. Knuth [259] cites A. M. Turing for
the development of stacks for subroutine linkage in 1947.

Pointer-based data structures also seem to be a folk invention.
According to Knuth, pointers were apparently used in early computers
with drum memories. The A-1 language developed by G. M. Hopper in
1951 represented algebraic formulas as binary trees. Knuth credits the
IPL-II language, developed in 1956 by A. Newell, J. C. Shaw, and H. A.
Simon, for recognizing the importance and promoting the use of
pointers. Their IPL-III language, developed in 1957, included explicit
stack operations.

1 Because we have defined a mergeable heap to support MINIMUM and EXTRACT-MIN,

we can also refer to it as a mergeable min-heap. Alternatively, if it supports MAXIMUM and
EXTRACT-MAX, it is a mergeable max-heap.

11 Hash Tables

Many applications require a dynamic set that supports only the
dictionary operations INSERT, SEARCH, and DELETE. For example,
a compiler that translates a programming language maintains a symbol
table, in which the keys of elements are arbitrary character strings
corresponding to identifiers in the language. A hash table is an effective
data structure for implementing dictionaries. Although searching for an
element in a hash table can take as long as searching for an element in a

linked list--(n) time in the worst case--in practice, hashing performs

extremely well. Under reasonable assumptions, the average time to

search for an element in a hash table is O(1). Indeed, the built-in

dictionaries of Python are implemented with hash tables.
A hash table generalizes the simpler notion of an ordinary array.

Directly addressing into an ordinary array takes advantage of the O(1)

access time for any array element. Section 11.1 discusses direct
addressing in more detail. To use direct addressing, you must be able to
allocate an array that contains a position for every possible key.

When the number of keys actually stored is small relative to the total
number of possible keys, hash tables become an effective alternative to
directly addressing an array, since a hash table typically uses an array of
size proportional to the number of keys actually stored. Instead of

using the key as an array index directly, we compute the array index

from the key. Section 11.2 presents the main ideas, focusing on
"chaining" as a way to handle "collisions," in which more than one key
maps to the same array index. Section 11.3 describes how to compute
array indices from keys using hash functions. We present and analyze

several variations on the basic theme. Section 11.4 looks at "open
addressing," which is another way to deal with collisions. The bottom
line is that hashing is an extremely effective and practical technique: the

basic dictionary operations require only O(1) time on the average.

Section 11.5 discusses the hierarchical memory systems of modern
computer systems have and illustrates how to design hash tables that
work well in such systems.