11.1 Direct-address tables

Direct addressing is a simple technique that works well when the

universe U of keys is reasonably small. Suppose that an application

needs a dynamic set in which each element has a distinct key drawn

from the universe U = {0, 1, ..., m - 1}, where m is not too large.
To represent the dynamic set, you can use an array, or direct-address

table, denoted by T[0 : m - 1], in which each position, or slot,
corresponds to a key in the universe U. Figure 11.1 illustrates this
approach. Slot k points to an element in the set with key k. If the set
contains no element with key k, then T[k] = NIL.

The dictionary operations DIRECT-ADDRESS-SEARCH,
DIRECT-ADDRESS-INSERT, and DIRECT-ADDRESS-DELETE on

the following page are trivial to implement. Each takes only O(1) time.

For some applications, the direct-address table itself can hold the
elements in the dynamic set. That is, rather than storing an element's
key and satellite data in an object external to the direct-address table,
with a pointer from a slot in the table to the object, save space by
storing the object directly in the slot. To indicate an empty slot, use a
special key. Then again, why store the key of the object at all? The index

of the object is its key! Of course, then you'd need some way to tell

whether slots are empty.

Figure 11.1 How to implement a dynamic set by a direct-address table T. Each key in the
universe U = {0, 1, ..., 9} corresponds to an index into the table. The set K = {2, 3, 5, 8} of

actual keys determines the slots in the table that contain pointers to elements. The other slots,
in blue, contain NIL.

DIRECT-ADDRESS-SEARCH(T, k)
1return T[k]

DIRECT-ADDRESS-INSERT(T, x)
1T[x.key] = x

DIRECT-ADDRESS-DELETE(T, x)
1T[x.key] = NIL

Exercises

11.1-1
A dynamic set S is represented by a direct-address table T of length m.
Describe a procedure that finds the maximum element of S. What is the

worst-case performance of your procedure?

11.1-2
A bit vector is simply an array of bits (each either 0 or 1). A bit vector
of length m takes much less space than an array of m pointers. Describe

how to use a bit vector to represent a dynamic set of distinct elements

drawn from the set {0, 1, ..., m - 1} and with no satellite data.
Dictionary operations should run in O(1) time.

11.1-3

Suggest how to implement a direct-address table in which the keys of
stored elements do not need to be distinct and the elements can have
satellite data. All three dictionary operations (INSERT, DELETE, and

SEARCH) should run in O(1) time. (Don't forget that DELETE takes as

an argument a pointer to an object to be deleted, not a key.)

11.1-4

Suppose that you want to implement a dictionary by using direct

addressing on a huge array. That is, if the array size is m and the
dictionary contains at most n elements at any one time, then m n. At

the start, the array entries may contain garbage, and initializing the
entire array is impractical because of its size. Describe a scheme for
implementing a direct-address dictionary on a huge array. Each stored

object should use O(1) space; the operations SEARCH, INSERT, and
DELETE should take O(1) time each; and initializing the data structure
should take O(1) time. (Hint: Use an additional array, treated somewhat

like a stack whose size is the number of keys actually stored in the
dictionary, to help determine whether a given entry in the huge array is
valid or not.)