11.3 Hash functions

For hashing to work well, it needs a good hash function. Along with
being efficiently computable, what properties does a good hash function

have? How do you design good hash functions?
This section first attempts to answer these questions based on two

ad hoc approaches for creating hash functions: hashing by division and
hashing by multiplication. Although these methods work well for some
sets of input keys, they are limited because they try to provide a single
fixed hash function that works well on any data--an approach called

static hashing.
We then see that provably good average-case performance for any

data can be obtained by designing a suitable family of hash functions

and choosing a hash function at random from this family at runtime,
independent of the data to be hashed. The approach we examine is
called random hashing. A particular kind of random hashing, universal
hashing, works well. As we saw with quicksort in Chapter 7,
randomization is a powerful algorithmic design tool.

What makes a good hash function?

A good hash function satisfies (approximately) the assumption of
independent uniform hashing: each key is equally likely to hash to any

of the m slots, independently of where any other keys have hashed to.

What does "equally likely" mean here? If the hash function is fixed, any
probabilities would have to be based on the probability distribution of
the input keys.

Unfortunately, you typically have no way to check this condition,
unless you happen to know the probability distribution from which the
keys are drawn. Moreover, the keys might not be drawn independently.

Occasionally you might know the distribution. For example, if you

know that the keys are random real numbers k independently and
uniformly distributed in the range 0 k < 1, then the hash function

h(k) = km

satisfies the condition of independent uniform hashing.
A good static hashing approach derives the hash value in a way that

you expect to be independent of any patterns that might exist in the
data. For example, the "division method" (discussed in Section 11.3.1)
computes the hash value as the remainder when the key is divided by a

specified prime number. This method may give good results, if you
(somehow) choose a prime number that is unrelated to any patterns in
the distribution of keys.

Random hashing, described in Section 11.3.2, picks the hash
function to be used at random from a suitable family of hashing
functions. This approach removes any need to know anything about the
probability distribution of the input keys, as the randomization
necessary for good average-case behavior then comes from the (known)
random process used to pick the hash function from the family of hash
functions, rather than from the (unknown) process used to create the
input keys. We recommend that you use random hashing.

Keys are integers, vectors, or strings

In practice, a hash function is designed to handle keys that are one of
the following two types:

A short nonnegative integer that fits in a w-bit machine word.
Typical values for w would be 32 or 64.

A short vector of nonnegative integers, each of bounded size. For
example, each element might be an 8-bit byte, in which case the
vector is often called a (byte) string. The vector might be of
variable length.

To begin, we assume that keys are short nonnegative integers. Handling
vector keys is more complicated and discussed in Sections 11.3.5 and
11.5.2.

11.3.1 Static hashing

Static hashing uses a single, fixed hash function. The only
randomization available is through the (usually unknown) distribution
of input keys. This section discusses two standard approaches for static
hashing: the division method and the multiplication method. Although
static hashing is no longer recommended, the multiplication method
also provides a good foundation for "nonstatic" hashing--better known
as random hashing--where the hash function is chosen at random from
a suitable family of hash functions.

The division method

The division method for creating hash functions maps a key k into one
of m slots by taking the remainder of k divided by m. That is, the hash

function is

h(k) = k mod m.

For example, if the hash table has size m = 12 and the key is k = 100,
then h(k) = 4. Since it requires only a single division operation, hashing

by division is quite fast.

The division method may work well when m is a prime not too close

to an exact power of 2. There is no guarantee that this method provides
good average-case performance, however, and it may complicate
applications since it constrains the size of the hash tables to be prime.

The multiplication method

The general multiplication method for creating hash functions operates
in two steps. First, multiply the key k by a constant A in the range 0 < A
< 1 and extract the fractional part of kA. Then, multiply this value by m

and take the floor of the result. That is, the hash function is

h(k) = m (kA mod 1),

where "kA mod 1" means the fractional part of kA, that is, kA - kA.

The general multiplication method has the advantage that the value of

m is not critical and you can choose it independently of how you choose
the multiplicative constant A.

Figure 11.4 The multiply-shift method to compute a hash function. The w-bit representation of
the key k is multiplied by the w-bit value a = A · 2w. The highest-order bits of the lower w-bit
half of the product form the desired hash value ha(k).

The multiply-shift method

In practice, the multiplication method is best in the special case where

the number m of hash-table slots is an exact power of 2, so that m = 2
for some integer , where w and w is the number of bits in a machine
word. If you choose a fixed w-bit positive integer a = A 2w, where 0 < A
< 1 as in the multiplication method so that a is in the range 0 < a < 2w,

you can implement the function on most computers as follows. We

assume that a key k fits into a single w-bit word.
Referring to Figure 11.4, first multiply k by the w-bit integer a. The

result is a 2w-bit value r12w + r0, where r1 is the high-order w-bit word
of the product and r0 is the low-order w-bit word of the product. The
desired -bit hash value consists of the most significant bits of r0.
(Since r1 is ignored, the hash function can be implemented on a
computer that produces only a w-bit product given two w-bit inputs,
that is, where the multiplication operation computes modulo 2w.)

In other words, you define the hash function h = ha, where

for a fixed nonzero w-bit value a. Since the product ka of two w-bit
words occupies 2w bits, taking this product modulo 2w zeroes out the
high-order w bits (r1), leaving only the low-order w bits (r0). The
operator performs a logical right shift by w - bits, shifting zeros into
the vacated positions on the left, so that the most significant bits of r0
move into the rightmost positions. (It's the same as dividing by 2wand taking the floor of the result.) The resulting value equals the most
significant bits of r0. The hash function ha can be implemented with

three machine instructions: multiplication, subtraction, and logical right

shift.

As an example, suppose that k = 123456, = 14, m = 214 = 16384,
and w = 32. Suppose further that we choose a = 2654435769 (following
a suggestion of Knuth [261]). Then ka = 327706022297664 = (76300 ·
232) + 17612864, and so r1 = 76300 and r0 = 17612864. The 14 most
significant bits of r0 yield the value ha(k) = 67.

Even though the multiply-shift method is fast, it doesn't provide any

guarantee of good average-case performance. The universal hashing

approach presented in the next section provides such a guarantee. A

simple randomized variant of the multiply-shift method works well on

the average, when the program begins by picking a as a randomly

chosen odd integer.

11.3.2 Random hashing

Suppose that a malicious adversary chooses the keys to be hashed by

some fixed hash function. Then the adversary can choose n keys that all
hash to the same slot, yielding an average retrieval time of (n). Any

static hash function is vulnerable to such terrible worst-case behavior.

The only effective way to improve the situation is to choose the hash

function randomly in a way that is independent of the keys that are
actually going to be stored. This approach is called random hashing. A
special case of this approach, called universal hashing, can yield

provably good performance on average when collisions are handled by

chaining, no matter which keys the adversary chooses.

To use random hashing, at the beginning of program execution you

select the hash function at random from a suitable family of functions.

As in the case of quicksort, randomization guarantees that no single

input always evokes worst-case behavior. Because you randomly select

the hash function, the algorithm can behave differently on each

execution, even for the same set of keys to be hashed, guaranteeing

good average-case performance.
Let H be a finite family of hash functions that map a given universe

U of keys into the range {0, 1, ..., m - 1}. Such a family is said to be
universal if for each pair of distinct keys k1, k2 U, the number of hash
functions h H for which h(k1) = h(k2) is at most |H|/m. In other

words, with a hash function randomly chosen from H, the chance of a

collision between distinct keys k1 and k2 is no more than the chance
1/m of a collision if h(k1) and h(k2) were randomly and independently
chosen from the set {0, 1, ..., m - 1}.

Independent uniform hashing is the same as picking a hash function

uniformly at random from a family of mn hash functions, each member
of that family mapping the n keys to the m hash values in a different

way.

Every independent uniform random family of hash function is

universal, but the converse need not be true: consider the case where U
= {0, 1, ..., m - 1} and the only hash function in the family is the

identity function. The probability that two distinct keys collide is zero,

even though each key is hashes to a fixed value.

The following corollary to Theorem 11.2 on page 279 says that

universal hashing provides the desired payoff: it becomes impossible for

an adversary to pick a sequence of operations that forces the worst-

case running time.

Corollary 11.3

Using universal hashing and collision resolution by chaining in an

initially empty table with m slots, it takes (s) expected time to handle
any sequence of s INSERT, SEARCH, and DELETE operations
containing n = O(m) INSERT operations.

Proof The INSERT and DELETE operations take constant time. Since
the number n of insertions is O(m), we have that = O(1). Furthermore,
the expected time for each SEARCH operation is O(1), which can be

seen by examining the proof of Theorem 11.2. That analysis depends

only on collision probabilities, which are 1/m for any pair k1, k2 of keys

by the choice of an independent uniform hash function in that theorem.
Using a universal family of hash functions here instead of using
independent uniform hashing changes the probability of collision from

1/m to at most 1/m. By linearity of expectation, therefore, the expected
time for the entire sequence of s operations is O(s). Since each
operation takes (1) time, the (s) bound follows.

11.3.3 Achievable properties of random hashing

There is a rich literature on the properties a family H of hash functions
can have, and how they relate to the efficiency of hashing. We
summarize a few of the most interesting ones here.

Let H be a family of hash functions, each with domain U and range
{0, 1, ..., m - 1}, and let h be any hash function that is picked uniformly

at random from H. The probabilities mentioned are probabilities over

the picks of h.

The family H is uniform if for any key k in U and any slot q in the
range {0, 1, ..., m - 1}, the probability that h(k) = q is 1/m.

The family H is universal if for any distinct keys k1 and k2 in U,
the probability that h(k1) = h(k2) is at most 1/m.

The family H of hash functions is -universal if for any distinct
keys k1 and k2 in U, the probability that h(k1) = h(k2) is at most
. Therefore, a universal family of hash functions is also 1/m-

universal.2

The family H is d-independent if for any distinct keys k1, k2, ...,
kd in U and any slots q1, q2, ..., qd, not necessarily distinct, in {0,

1, ..., m - 1} the probability that h(ki) = qi for i = 1, 2, ..., d is
1/md.

Universal hash-function families are of particular interest, as they are
the simplest type supporting provably efficient hash-table operations for
any input data set. Many other interesting and desirable properties,
such as those noted above, are also possible and allow for efficient
specialized hash-table operations.

11.3.4 Designing a universal family of hash functions

This section present two ways to design a universal (or -universal)
family of hash functions: one based on number theory and another
based on a randomized variant of the multiply-shift method presented
in Section 11.3.1. The first method is a bit easier to prove universal, but
the second method is newer and faster in practice.

A universal family of hash functions based on number theory

We can design a universal family of hash functions using a little number

theory. You may wish to refer to Chapter 31 if you are unfamiliar with

basic concepts in number theory.

Begin by choosing a prime number p large enough so that every

possible key k lies in the range 0 to p - 1, inclusive. We assume here that

p has a "reasonable" length. (See Section 11.3.5 for a discussion of

methods for handling long input keys, such as variable-length strings.)

Let p denote the set {0, 1, ..., p - 1}, and let denote the set {1, 2,

..., p - 1}. Since p is prime, we can solve equations modulo p with the

methods given in Chapter 31. Because the size of the universe of keys is

greater than the number of slots in the hash table (otherwise, just use

direct addressing), we have p > m.

Given any and any b p, define the hash function hab as a

linear transformation followed by reductions modulo p and then

modulo m:

For example, with p = 17 and m = 6, we have

h3,4(8) = ((3 · 8 + 4) mod 17) mod 6

= (28 mod 17) mod 6
= 11 mod 6
= 5.

Given p and m, the family of all such hash functions is

Each hash function hab maps p to m. This family of hash functions
has the nice property that the size m of the output range (which is the

size of the hash table) is arbitrary--it need not be prime. Since you can

choose from among p - 1 values for a and p values for b, the family
Hpm contains p(p - 1) hash functions.

Theorem 11.4
The family Hpm of hash functions defined by equations (11.3) and

(11.4) is universal.

Proof Consider two distinct keys k1 and k2 from p, so that k1 k2.
For a given hash function hab, let

r1 = (ak1 + b) mod p,
r2 = (ak2 + b) mod p.

We first note that r1 r2. Why? Since we have r1 - r2 = a(k1 - k2)
(mod p), it follows that r1 r2 because p is prime and both a and (k1 -
k2) are nonzero modulo p. By Theorem 31.6 on page 908, their product
must also be nonzero modulo p. Therefore, when computing any hab
Hpm, distinct inputs k1 and k2 map to distinct values r1 and r2
modulo p, and there are no collisions yet at the "mod p level."
Moreover, each of the possible p(p - 1) choices for the pair (a, b) with a
0 yields a different resulting pair (r1, r2) with r1 r2, since we can
solve for a and b given r1 and r2:

a = ((r - r2)((k1 - k2)-1 mod p)) mod p,
b = (r1 - ak1) mod p,

where ((k1 - k2)-1 mod p) denotes the unique multiplicative inverse,

modulo p, of k1 - k2. For each of the p possible values of r1, there are

only p - 1 possible values of r2 that do not equal r1, making only p(p -

1) possible pairs (r1, r2) with r1 r2. Therefore, there is a one-to-one

correspondence between pairs (a, b) with a 0 and pairs (r1, r2) with r1

r2. Thus, for any given pair of distinct inputs k1 and k2, if we pick (a,

b) uniformly at random from , the resulting pair (r1, r2) is

equally likely to be any pair of distinct values modulo p.

Therefore, the probability that distinct keys k1 and k2 collide is equal

to the probability that r1 = r2 (mod m) when r1 and r2 are randomly

chosen as distinct values modulo p. For a given value of r1, of the p - 1

possible remaining values for r2, the number of values r2 such that r2

r1 and r2 = r1 (mod m) is at most

The probability that r2 collides with r1 when reduced modulo m is at
most ((p - 1)/m)/(p - 1) = 1/m, since r2 is equally likely to be any of the
p - 1 values in Zp that are different from r1, but at most (p - 1)/m of
those values are equivalent to r1 modulo m.

Therefore, for any pair of distinct values k1, k2 p,

Pr{hab(k1) = hab(k2)} 1/m,

so that Hpm is indeed universal.

A 2/m-universal family of hash functions based on the multiply-shift

method

We recommend that in practice you use the following hash-function
family based on the multiply-shift method. It is exceptionally efficient

and (although we omit the proof) provably 2/m-universal. Define H to
be the family of multiply-shift hash functions with odd constants a:

Theorem 11.5
The family of hash functions H given by equation (11.5) is 2/m-

universal.

That is, the probability that any two distinct keys collide is at most

2/m. In many practical situations, the speed of computing the hash

function more than compensates for the higher upper bound on the
probability that two distinct keys collide when compared with a
universal hash function.

11.3.5 Hashing long inputs such as vectors or strings
Sometimes hash function inputs are so long that they cannot be easily

encoded modulo a reasonably sized prime number p or encoded within

a single word of, say, 64 bits. As an example, consider the class of
vectors, such as vectors of 8-bit bytes (which is how strings in many
programming languages are stored). A vector might have an arbitrary
nonnegative length, in which case the length of the input to the hash
function may vary from input to input.

Number-theoretic approaches

One way to design good hash functions for variable-length inputs is to
extend the ideas used in Section 11.3.4 to design universal hash
functions. Exercise 11.3-6 explores one such approach.

Cryptographic hashing

Another way to design a good hash function for variable-length inputs
is to use a hash function designed for cryptographic applications.

Cryptographic hash functions are complex pseudorandom functions,

designed for applications requiring properties beyond those needed
here, but are robust, widely implemented, and usable as hash functions
for hash tables.

A cryptographic hash function takes as input an arbitrary byte
string and returns a fixed-length output. For example, the NIST
standard deterministic cryptographic hash function SHA-256 [346]
produces a 256-bit (32-byte) output for any input.

Some chip manufacturers include instructions in their CPU
architectures to provide fast implementations of some cryptographic
functions. Of particular interest are instructions that efficiently
implement rounds of the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES), the
"AES-NI" instructions. These instructions execute in a few tens of
nanoseconds, which is generally fast enough for use with hash tables. A
message authentication code such as CBC-MAC based on AES and the
use of the AES-NI instructions could be a useful and efficient hash
function. We don't pursue the potential use of specialized instruction
sets further here.

Cryptographic hash functions are useful because they provide a way
of implementing an approximate version of a random oracle. As noted
earlier, a random oracle is equivalent to an independent uniform hash
function family. From a theoretical point of view, a random oracle is an
unachievable ideal: a deterministic function that provides a randomly
selected output for each input. Because it is deterministic, it provides
the same output if queried again for the same input. From a practical
point of view, constructions of hash function families based on
cryptographic hash functions are sensible substitutes for random
oracles.

There are many ways to use a cryptographic hash function as a hash
function. For example, we could define

h(k) = SHA-256(k) mod m.

To define a family of such hash functions one may prepend a "salt"

string a to the input before hashing it, as in

ha(k) = SHA-256(a k) mod m,

where a k denotes the string formed by concatenating the strings a
and k. The literature on message authentication codes (MACs) provides

additional approaches.
Cryptographic approaches to hash-function design are becoming

more practical as computers arrange their memories in hierarchies of
differing capacities and speeds. Section 11.5 discusses one hashfunction design based on the RC6 encryption method.

Exercises

11.3-1
You wish to search a linked list of length n, where each element contains
a key k along with a hash value h(k). Each key is a long character

string. How might you take advantage of the hash values when
searching the list for an element with a given key?

11.3-2
You hash a string of r characters into m slots by treating it as a radix-

128 number and then using the division method. You can represent the

number m as a 32-bit computer word, but the string of r characters,

treated as a radix-128 number, takes many words. How can you apply
the division method to compute the hash value of the character string
without using more than a constant number of words of storage outside
the string itself ?

11.3-3
Consider a version of the division method in which h(k) = k mod m,
where m = 2p - 1 and k is a character string interpreted in radix 2p.
Show that if string x can be converted to string y by permuting its
characters, then x and y hash to the same value. Give an example of an

application in which this property would be undesirable in a hash
function.

11.3-4

Consider a hash table of size m = 1000 and a corresponding hash

function h(k) = m (kA mod 1) for . Compute the

locations to which the keys 61, 62, 63, 64, and 65 are mapped.

11.3-5

Show that any -universal family H of hash functions from a finite set

U to a finite set Q has 1/|Q| - 1/|U|.

11.3-6
Let U be the set of d-tuples of values drawn from p, and let Q = p,
where p is prime. Define the hash function hb : U Q for b p on an
input d-tuple a0, a1, ..., ad-1 from U as

and let H = {hb : b p}. Argue that H is -universal for = (d -
1)/p. (Hint: See Exercise 31.4-4.)