11.4 Open addressing

This section describes open addressing, a method for collision
resolution that, unlike chaining, does not make use of storage outside of

the hash table itself. In open addressing, all elements occupy the hash

table itself. That is, each table entry contains either an element of the
dynamic set or NIL. No lists or elements are stored outside the table,
unlike in chaining. Thus, in open addressing, the hash table can "fill up"
so that no further insertions can be made. One consequence is that the
load factor can never exceed 1.

Collisions are handled as follows: when a new element is to be
inserted into the table, it is placed in its "first-choice" location if
possible. If that location is already occupied, the new element is placed
in its "second-choice" location. The process continues until an empty
slot is found in which to place the new element. Different elements have
different preference orders for the locations.

To search for an element, systematically examine the preferred table
slots for that element, in order of decreasing preference, until either you
find the desired element or you find an empty slot and thus verify that
the element is not in the table.

Of course, you could use chaining and store the linked lists inside the
hash table, in the otherwise unused hash-table slots (see Exercise 11.24), but the advantage of open addressing is that it avoids pointers
altogether. Instead of following pointers, you compute the sequence of
slots to be examined. The memory freed by not storing pointers
provides the hash table with a larger number of slots in the same
amount of memory, potentially yielding fewer collisions and faster
retrieval.

To perform insertion using open addressing, successively examine, or

probe, the hash table until you find an empty slot in which to put the
key. Instead of being fixed in the order 0, 1, ..., m - 1 (which implies a
(n) search time), the sequence of positions probed depends upon the

key being inserted. To determine which slots to probe, the hash function
includes the probe number (starting from 0) as a second input. Thus,
the hash function becomes

h : U × {0, 1, ..., m - 1} {0, 1, ..., m - 1}.

Open addressing requires that for every key k, the probe sequence h(k,
0), h(k, 1), ..., h(k, m - 1) be a permutation of 0, 1, ..., m - 1, so that

every hash-table position is eventually considered as a slot for a new
key as the table fills up. The HASH-INSERT procedure on the following

page assumes that the elements in the hash table T are keys with no
satellite information: the key k is identical to the element containing key
k. Each slot contains either a key or NIL (if the slot is empty). The
HASH-INSERT procedure takes as input a hash table T and a key
k that is assumed to be not already present in the hash table. It either
returns the slot number where it stores key k or flags an error because

the hash table is already full.

HASH-INSERT(T, k)
1i = 0

2 repeat

3 q = h(k, i)

4 if T[q] == NIL

5 T[q] = k

6 return q

7 else i = i + 1

8 until i == m

9 error "hash table overflow"

HASH-SEARCH(T, k)

1 i=0

2 repeat

3 q = h(k, i)

4 if T[q] == k

5 return q

6 i=i+1

7 until T[q] == NIL or i == m

8 return NIL

The algorithm for searching for key k probes the same sequence of
slots that the insertion algorithm examined when key k was inserted.

Therefore, the search can terminate (unsuccessfully) when it finds an

empty slot, since k would have been inserted there and not later in its

probe sequence. The procedure HASH-SEARCH takes as input a hash

table T and a key k, returning q if it finds that slot q contains key k, or
NIL if key k is not present in table T.

Deletion from an open-address hash table is tricky. When you delete

a key from slot q, it would be a mistake to mark that slot as empty by

simply storing NIL in it. If you did, you might be unable to retrieve any

key k for which slot q was probed and found occupied when k was

inserted. One way to solve this problem is by marking the slot, storing

in it the special value DELETED instead of NIL. The HASH-INSERT

procedure then has to treat such a slot as empty so that it can insert a

new key there. The HASH-SEARCH procedure passes over DELETED

values while searching, since slots containing DELETED were filled

when the key being searched for was inserted. Using the special value
DELETED, however, means that search times no longer depend on the
load factor , and for this reason chaining is frequently selected as a
collision resolution technique when keys must be deleted. There is a
simple special case of open addressing, linear probing, that avoids the
need to mark slots with DELETED. Section 11.5.1 shows how to delete
from a hash table when using linear probing.

In our analysis, we assume independent uniform permutation hashing
(also confusingly known as uniform hashing in the literature): the probe
sequence of each key is equally likely to be any of the m! permutations
of 0, 1, ..., m - 1. Independent uniform permutation hashing

generalizes the notion of independent uniform hashing defined earlier
to a hash function that produces not just a single slot number, but a
whole probe sequence. True independent uniform permutation hashing
is difficult to implement, however, and in practice suitable
approximations (such as double hashing, defined below) are used.

We'll examine both double hashing and its special case, linear

probing. These techniques guarantee that h(k, 0), h(k, 1), ..., h(k, m -
1) is a permutation of 0, 1, ..., m - 1 for each key k. (Recall that the
second parameter to the hash function h is the probe number.) Neither

double hashing nor linear probing meets the assumption of independent
uniform permutation hashing, however. Double hashing cannot

generate more than m2 different probe sequences (instead of the m! that

independent uniform permutation hashing requires). Nonetheless,
double hashing has a large number of possible probe sequences and, as
you might expect, seems to give good results. Linear probing is even

more restricted, capable of generating only m different probe sequences.

Double hashing

Double hashing offers one of the best methods available for open
addressing because the permutations produced have many of the

characteristics of randomly chosen permutations. Double hashing uses a

hash function of the form

h(k, i) = (h1(k) + ih2(k)) mod m,

where both h1 and h2 are auxiliary hash functions. The initial probe
goes to position T[h1(k)], and successive probe positions are offset from
previous positions by the amount h2(k), modulo m. Thus, the probe
sequence here depends in two ways upon the key k, since the initial
probe position h1(k), the step size h2(k), or both, may vary. Figure 11.5

gives an example of insertion by double hashing.

In order for the entire hash table to be searched, the value h2(k)
must be relatively prime to the hash-table size m. (See Exercise 11.4-5.)
A convenient way to ensure this condition is to let m be an exact power
of 2 and to design h2 so that it always produces an odd number.
Another way is to let m be prime and to design h2 so that it always
returns a positive integer less than m. For example, you could choose m

prime and let

Figure 11.5 Insertion by double hashing. The hash table has size 13 with h1(k) = k mod 13 and
h2(k) = 1 + (k mod 11). Since 14 = 1 (mod 13) and 14 = 3 (mod 11), the key 14 goes into

empty slot 9, after slots 1 and 5 are examined and found to be occupied.

h1(k) = k mod m,
h2(k) = 1 + (k mod m),

where m is chosen to be slightly less than m (say, m - 1). For example, if
k = 123456, m = 701, and m = 700, then h1(k) = 80 and h2(k) = 257, so

that the first probe goes to position 80, and successive probes examine

every 257th slot (modulo m) until the key has been found or every slot

has been examined.

Although values of m other than primes or exact powers of 2 can in

principle be used with double hashing, in practice it becomes more

difficult to efficiently generate h2(k) (other than choosing h2(k) = 1,

which gives linear probing) in a way that ensures that it is relatively

prime to m, in part because the relative density (m)/m of such numbers
for general m may be small (see equation (31.25) on page 921).

When m is prime or an exact power of 2, double hashing produces
(m2) probe sequences, since each possible (h1(k), h2(k)) pair yields a
distinct probe sequence. As a result, for such values of m, double

hashing appears to perform close to the "ideal" scheme of independent
uniform permutation hashing.

Linear probing

Linear probing, a special case of double hashing, is the simplest open-

addressing approach to resolving collisions. As with double hashing, an

auxiliary hash function h1 determines the first probe position h1(k) for
inserting an element. If slot T[h1(k)] is already occupied, probe the next
position T[h1(k) + 1]. Keep going as necessary, on up to slot T[m - 1],
and then wrap around to slots T[0], T[1], and so on, but never going
past slot T[h1(k) - 1]. To view linear probing as a special case of double
hashing, just set the double-hashing step function h2 to be fixed at 1:
h2(k) = 1 for all k. That is, the hash function is

for i = 0, 1, ..., m - 1. The value of h1(k) determines the entire probe
sequence, and so assuming that h1(k) can take on any value in {0, 1, ...,
m - 1}, linear probing allows only m distinct probe sequences.

We'll revisit linear probing in Section 11.5.1.

Analysis of open-address hashing

As in our analysis of chaining in Section 11.2, we analyze open

addressing in terms of the load factor = n/m of the hash table. With
open addressing, at most one element occupies each slot, and thus n
m, which implies 1. The analysis below requires to be strictly less

than 1, and so we assume that at least one slot is empty. Because
deleting from an open-address hash table does not really free up a slot,
we assume as well that no deletions occur.

For the hash function, we assume independent uniform permutation

hashing. In this idealized scheme, the probe sequence h(k, 0), h(k, 1),
..., h(k, m - 1) used to insert or search for each key k is equally likely
to be any permutation of 0, 1, ..., m - 1. Of course, any given key has

a unique fixed probe sequence associated with it. What we mean here is
that, considering the probability distribution on the space of keys and
the operation of the hash function on the keys, each possible probe
sequence is equally likely.

We now analyze the expected number of probes for hashing with
open addressing under the assumption of independent uniform
permutation hashing, beginning with the expected number of probes
made in an unsuccessful search (assuming, as stated above, that < 1).

The bound proven, of 1/(1 - ) = 1 + + 2 + 3 + , has an
intuitive interpretation. The first probe always occurs. With probability
approximately , the first probe finds an occupied slot, so that a second
probe happens. With probability approximately 2, the first two slots
are occupied so that a third probe ensues, and so on.

Theorem 11.6
Given an open-address hash table with load factor = n/m < 1, the

expected number of probes in an unsuccessful search is at most 1/(1 -
), assuming independent uniform permutation hashing and no
deletions.

Proof In an unsuccessful search, every probe but the last accesses an

occupied slot that does not contain the desired key, and the last slot

probed is empty. Let the random variable X denote the number of

probes made in an unsuccessful search, and define the event Ai, for i =
1, 2, ..., as the event that an ith probe occurs and it is to an occupied
slot. Then the event {X i} is the intersection of events A1 A2
Ai-1. We bound Pr{X i} by bounding Pr{A1 A2 Ai-1}.

By Exercise C.2-5 on page 1190,

Pr{A1 A2 = Pr{A1} · Pr{A2 | A1} · Pr {A3 | A1 A2}

Ai-1}

Pr{Ai-1 | A1 A2 Ai-2}.

Since there are n elements and m slots, Pr{A1} = n/m. For j > 1, the
probability that there is a jth probe and it is to an occupied slot, given
that the first j - 1 probes were to occupied slots, is (n - j + 1)/(m - j +
1). This probability follows because the jth probe would be finding one
of the remaining (n - (j - 1)) elements in one of the (m - (j - 1))

unexamined slots, and by the assumption of independent uniform

permutation hashing, the probability is the ratio of these quantities.

Since n < m implies that (n - j)/(m - j) n/m for all j in the range 0 j <
m, it follows that for all i in the range 1 i m, we have

The product in the first line has i - 1 factors. When i = 1, the product is
1, the identity for multiplication, and we get Pr{X 1} = 1, which makes
sense, since there must always be at least 1 probe. If each of the first n

probes is to an occupied slot, then all occupied slots have been probed.

Then, the (n + 1)st probe must be to an empty slot, which gives Pr{X
i} = 0 for i > n + 1. Now, we use equation (C.28) on page 1193 to bound

the expected number of probes:

If is a constant, Theorem 11.6 predicts that an unsuccessful search

runs in O(1) time. For example, if the hash table is half full, the average

number of probes in an unsuccessful search is at most 1/(1 - .5) = 2. If
it is 90% full, the average number of probes is at most 1/(1 - .9) = 10.

Theorem 11.6 yields almost immediately how well the HASHINSERT procedure performs.

Corollary 11.7

Inserting an element into an open-address hash table with load factor
, where < 1, requires at most 1/(1 - ) probes on average, assuming
independent uniform permutation hashing and no deletions.

Proof An element is inserted only if there is room in the table, and thus

< 1. Inserting a key requires an unsuccessful search followed by
placing the key into the first empty slot found. Thus, the expected
number of probes is at most 1/(1 - ).

It takes a little more work to compute the expected number of
probes for a successful search.

Theorem 11.8

Given an open-address hash table with load factor < 1, the expected
number of probes in a successful search is at most

assuming independent uniform permutation hashing with no deletions
and assuming that each key in the table is equally likely to be searched
for.

Proof A search for a key k reproduces the same probe sequence as
when the element with key k was inserted. If k was the (i + 1)st key

inserted into the hash table, then the load factor at the time it was

inserted was i/m, and so by Corollary 11.7, the expected number of
probes made in a search for k is at most 1/(1 - i/m) = m/(m - i).
Averaging over all n keys in the hash table gives us the expected number

of probes in a successful search:

If the hash table is half full, the expected number of probes in a
successful search is less than 1.387. If the hash table is 90% full, the
expected number of probes is less than 2.559. If = 1, then in an

unsuccessful search, all m slots must be probed. Exercise 11.4-4 asks

you to analyze a successful search when = 1.

Exercises

11.4-1

Consider inserting the keys 10, 22, 31, 4, 15, 28, 17, 88, 59 into a hash

table of length m = 11 using open addressing. Illustrate the result of
inserting these keys using linear probing with h(k, i) = (k + i) mod m
and using double hashing with h1(k) = k and h2(k) = 1 + (k mod (m -

1)).

11.4-2

Write pseudocode for HASH-DELETE that fills the deleted key's slot
with the special value DELETED, and modify HASH-SEARCH and
HASH-INSERT as needed to handle DELETED.

11.4-3

Consider an open-address hash table with independent uniform
permutation hashing and no deletions. Give upper bounds on the
expected number of probes in an unsuccessful search and on the
expected number of probes in a successful search when the load factor
is 3/4 and when it is 7/8.

11.4-4

Show that the expected number of probes required for a successful

search when = 1 (that is, when n = m), is Hm, the mth harmonic

number.

11.4-5
Show that, with double hashing, if m and h2(k) have greatest common
divisor d 1 for some key k, then an unsuccessful search for key k
examines (1/d)th of the hash table before returning to slot h1(k). Thus,
when d = 1, so that m and h2(k) are relatively prime, the search may
examine the entire hash table. (Hint: See Chapter 31.)

11.4-6

Consider an open-address hash table with a load factor . Approximate
the nonzero value for which the expected number of probes in an

unsuccessful search equals twice the expected number of probes in a
successful search. Use the upper bounds given by Theorems 11.6 and
11.8 for these expected numbers of probes.