11.5 Practical considerations

Efficient hash table algorithms are not only of theoretical interest, but
also of immense practical importance. Constant factors can matter. For
this reason, this section discusses two aspects of modern CPUs that are
not included in the standard RAM model presented in Section 2.2:

Memory hierarchies: The memory of modern CPUs has a number of

levels, from the fast registers, through one or more levels of cache
memory, to the main-memory level. Each successive level stores more

data than the previous level, but access is slower. As a consequence, a
complex computation (such as a complicated hash function) that
works entirely within the fast registers can take less time than a single
read operation from main memory. Furthermore, cache memory is

organized in cache blocks of (say) 64 bytes each, which are always

fetched together from main memory. There is a substantial benefit for
ensuring that memory usage is local: reusing the same cache block is
much more efficient than fetching a different cache block from main
memory.

The standard RAM model measures efficiency of a hash-table
operation by counting the number of hash-table slots probed. In
practice, this metric is only a crude approximation to the truth, since
once a cache block is in the cache, successive probes to that cache
block are much faster than probes that must access main memory.

Advanced instruction sets: Modern CPUs may have sophisticated
instruction sets that implement advanced primitives useful for
encryption or other forms of cryptography. These instructions may be
useful in the design of exceptionally efficient hash functions.

Section 11.5.1 discusses linear probing, which becomes the collisionresolution method of choice in the presence of a memory hierarchy.

Section 11.5.2 suggests how to construct "advanced" hash functions
based on cryptographic primitives, suitable for use on computers with
hierarchical memory models.

11.5.1 Linear probing

Linear probing is often disparaged because of its poor performance in
the standard RAM model. But linear probing excels for hierarchical
memory models, because successive probes are usually to the same
cache block of memory.

Deletion with linear probing

Another reason why linear probing is often not used in practice is that
deletion seems complicated or impossible without using the special
DELETED value. Yet we'll now see that deletion from a hash table
based on linear probing is not all that difficult, even without the
DELETED marker. The deletion procedure works for linear probing,
but not for open-address probing in general, because with linear
probing keys all follow the same simple cyclic probing sequence (albeit
with different starting points).

The deletion procedure relies on an "inverse" function to the linear-

probing hash function h(k, i) = (h1(k) + i) mod m, which maps a key k
and a probe number i to a slot number in the hash table. The inverse
function g maps a key k and a slot number q, where 0 q < m, to the
probe number that reaches slot q:

g(k, q) = (q - h1(k)) mod m.

If h(k, i) = q, then g(k, q) = i, and so h(k, g(k, q)) = q.

The procedure LINEAR-PROBING-HASH-DELETE on the facing

page deletes the key stored in position q from hash table T. Figure 11.6
shows how it works. The procedure first deletes the key in position q by
setting T[q] to NIL in line 2. It then searches for a slot q (if any) that
contains a key that should be moved to the slot q just vacated by key k.
Line 9 asks the critical question: does the key k in slot q need to be
moved to the vacated slot q in order to preserve the accessibility of k?
If g(k, q) < g(k, q), then during the insertion of k into the table, slot q

was examined but found to be already occupied. But now slot q, where
a search will look for k, is empty. In this case, key k moves to slot q in

line 10, and the search continues, to see whether any later key also

needs to be moved to the slot q that was just freed up when k moved.

Figure 11.6 Deletion in a hash table that uses linear probing. The hash table has size 10 with

h1(k) = k mod 10. (a) The hash table after inserting keys in the order 74, 43, 93, 18, 82, 38,

92. (b) The hash table after deleting the key 43 from slot 3. Key 93 moves up to slot 3 to keep
it accessible, and then key 92 moves up to slot 5 just vacated by key 93. No other keys need to
be moved.

LINEAR-PROBING-HASH-DELETE(T, q)

1while TRUE // make slot q empty

2 T[q] = NIL // starting point for search

3 q = q // next slot number with linear probing
// next key to try to move
4 repeat
// return when an empty slot is found
5 q = (q + 1) mod m
// was empty slot q probed before q?
6 k = T[q] // move k into slot q
// free up slot q
7 if k == NIL

8 return

9 until g(k, q) < g(k, q)
10 T[q] = k

11 q = q

Analysis of linear probing

Linear probing is popular to implement, but it exhibits a phenomenon

known as primary clustering. Long runs of occupied slots build up,

increasing the average search time. Clusters arise because an empty slot

preceded by i full slots gets filled next with probability (i + 1)/m. Long

runs of occupied slots tend to get longer, and the average search time
increases.

In the standard RAM model, primary clustering is a problem, and
general double hashing usually performs better than linear probing. By
contrast, in a hierarchical memory model, primary clustering is a
beneficial property, as elements are often stored together in the same
cache block. Searching proceeds through one cache block before
advancing to search the next cache block. With linear probing, the

running time for a key k of HASH-INSERT, HASH-SEARCH, or

LINEAR-PROBING-HASH-DELETE is at most proportional to the

distance from h1(k) to the next empty slot.

The following theorem is due to Pagh et al. [351]. A more recent
proof is given by Thorup [438]. We omit the proof here. The need for 5independence is by no means obvious; see the cited proofs.

Theorem 11.9
If h1 is 5-independent and 2/3, then it takes expected constant time

to search for, insert, or delete a key in a hash table using linear probing.

(Indeed, the expected operation time is O(1/ 2) for = 1 - .)

11.5.2 Hash functions for hierarchical memory models

This section illustrates an approach for designing efficient hash tables in
a modern computer system having a memory hierarchy.

Because of the memory hierarchy, linear probing is a good choice for
resolving collisions, as probe sequences are sequential and tend to stay
within cache blocks. But linear probing is most efficient when the hash
function is complex (for example, 5-independent as in Theorem 11.9).

Fortunately, having a memory hierarchy means that complex hash
functions can be implemented efficiently.

As noted in Section 11.3.5, one approach is to use a cryptographic
hash function such as SHA-256. Such functions are complex and
sufficiently random for hash table applications. On machines with
specialized instructions, cryptographic functions can be quite efficient.

Instead, we present here a simple hash function based only on
addition, multiplication, and swapping the halves of a word. This
function can be implemented entirely within the fast registers, and on a
machine with a memory hierarchy, its latency is small compared with
the time taken to access a random slot of the hash table. It is related to
the RC6 encryption algorithm and can for practical purposes be
considered a "random oracle."

The wee hash function

Let w denote the word size of the machine (e.g., w = 64), assumed to be
even, and let a and b be w-bit unsigned (nonnegative) integers such that
a is odd. Let swap(x) denote the w-bit result of swapping the two w/2bit halves of w-bit input x. That is,

swap(x) = (x (w/2)) + (x (w/2))

where "" is "logical right shift" (as in equation (11.2)) and " is
"left shift." Define

fa(k) = swap((2k2 + ak) mod 2w).

Thus, to compute fa(k), evaluate the quadratic function 2k2 + ak
modulo 2w and then swap the left and right halves of the result.

Let r denote a desired number of "rounds" for the computation of
the hash function. We'll use r = 4, but the hash function is well defined

for any nonnegative r. Denote by the result of iterating fa a total

of r times (that is, r rounds) starting with input value k. For any odd a

and any r 0, the function , although complicated, is one-to-one (see

Exercise 11.5-1). A cryptographer would view as a simple block

cipher operating on w-bit input blocks, with r rounds and key a.

We first define the wee hash function h for short inputs, where by
"short" we means "whose length t is at most w-bits," so that the input

fits within one computer word. We would like inputs of different lengths

to be hashed differently. The wee hash function ha,b,t,r(k) for
parameters a, b, and r on t-bit input k is defined as

That is, the hash value for t-bit input k is obtained by applying to k
+ b, then taking the final result modulo m. Adding the value b provides

hash-dependent randomization of the input, in a way that ensures that
for variable-length inputs the 0-length input does not have a fixed hash

value. Adding the value 2t to a ensures that the hash function acts
differently for inputs of different lengths. (We use 2t rather than t to
ensure that the key a + 2t is odd if a is odd.) We call this hash function

"wee" because it uses a tiny amount of memory--more precisely, it can
be implemented efficiently using only the computer's fast registers. (This
hash function does not have a name in the literature; it is a variant we
developed for this textbook.)

Speed of the wee hash function

It is surprising how much efficiency can be bought with locality.
Experiments (unpublished, by the authors) suggest that evaluating the

wee hash function takes less time than probing a single randomly

chosen slot in a hash table. These experiments were run on a laptop

(2019 MacBook Pro) with w = 64 and a = 123. For large hash tables,

evaluating the wee hash function was 2 to 10 times faster than
performing a single probe of the hash table.

The wee hash function for variable-length inputs

Sometimes inputs are long--more than one w-bit word in length--or

have variable length, as discussed in Section 11.3.5. We can extend the

wee hash function, defined above for inputs that are at most single w-bit

word in length, to handle long or variable-length inputs. Here is one
method for doing so.

Suppose that an input k has length t (measured in bits). Break k into
a sequence k1, k2, ..., ku of w-bit words, where u = t/w, k1 contains
the least-significant w bits of k, and ku contains the most significant
bits. If t is not a multiple of w, then ku contains fewer than w bits, in
which case, pad out the unused high-order bits of ku with 0-bits. Define
the function chop to return a sequence of the w-bit words in k:

chop(k) = k1, k2, ..., ku.

The most important property of the chop operation is that it is one-to-

one, given t: for any two t-bit keys k and k, if k k then chop(k)
chop(k), and k can be derived from chop(k) and t. The chop operation

also has the useful property that a single-word input key yields a single-

word output sequence: chop(k) = k.

With the chop function in hand, we specify the wee hash function

ha,b,t,r(k) for an input k of length t bits as follows:

ha,b,t,r(k) = WEE(k, a, b, t, r, m),

where the procedure WEE defined on the facing page iterates through

the elements of the w-bit words returned by chop(k), applying to the
sum of the current word ki and the previously computed hash value so
far, finally returning the result obtained modulo m. This definition for

variable-length and long (multiple-word) inputs is a consistent
extension of the definition in equation (11.7) for short (single-word)

inputs. For practical use, we recommend that a be a randomly chosen
odd w-bit word, b be a randomly chosen w-bit word, and that r = 4.

Note that the wee hash function is really a hash function family, with

individual hash functions determined by parameters a, b, t, r, and m.

The (approximate) 5-independence of the wee hash function family for
variable-length inputs can be argued based on the assumption that the
1-word wee hash function is a random oracle and on the security of the
cipher-block-chaining message authentication code (CBC-MAC), as
studied by Bellare et al. [42]. The case here is actually simpler than that

studied in the literature, since if two messages have different lengths t

and t, then their "keys" are different: a + 2t a + 2t. We omit the

details.

WEE(k, a, b, t, r, m)

1 u = t/w
2 k1, k2, ..., ku = chop(k)
3q = b
4 for i = 1 to u

5

6 return q mod m

This definition of a cryptographically inspired hash-function family
is meant to be realistic, yet only illustrative, and many variations and
improvements are possible. See the chapter notes for suggestions.

In summary, we see that when the memory system is hierarchical, it
becomes advantageous to use linear probing (a special case of double
hashing), since successive probes tend to stay in the same cache block.
Furthermore, hash functions that can be implemented using only the
computer's fast registers are exceptionally efficient, so they can be quite
complex and even cryptographically inspired, providing the high degree
of independence needed for linear probing to work most efficiently.

Exercises

11.5-1

Complete the argument that for any odd positive integer a and any

integer r 0, the function is one-to-one. Use a proof by

contradiction and make use of the fact that the function fa works

modulo 2w.

11.5-2

Argue that a random oracle is 5-independent.

11.5-3

Consider what happens to the value as we flip a single bit ki of

the input value k, for various values of r. Let and

define the bit values ki in the input (with k0 the leastsignificant bit) and the bit values bj in ga(k) = (2k2 + ak) mod 2w
(where ga(k) is the value that, when its halves are swapped, becomes
fa(k)). Suppose that flipping a single bit ki of the input k may cause any
bit bj of ga(k) to flip, for j i. What is the least value of r for which
flipping the value of any single bit ki may cause any bit of the output

to flip? Explain.

Problems

11-1 Longest-probe bound for hashing
Suppose you are using an open-addressed hash table of size m to store
n m/2 items.

a. Assuming independent uniform permutation hashing, show that for i
= 1, 2, ..., n, the probability is at most 2-p that the ith insertion
requires strictly more than p probes.

b. Show that for i = 1, 2, ..., n, the probability is O(1/n2) that the ith
insertion requires more than 2 lg n probes.

Let the random variable Xi denote the number of probes required by
the ith insertion. You have shown in part (b) that Pr{Xi > 2 lg n} =
O(1/n2). Let the random variable X = max {Xi : 1 i n} denote the
maximum number of probes required by any of the n insertions.

c. Show that Pr{X > 2 lg n} = O(1/n).

d. Show that the expected length E[X] of the longest probe sequence is
O(lg n).

11-2 Searching a static set

You are asked to implement a searchable set of n elements in which the

keys are numbers. The set is static (no INSERT or DELETE
operations), and the only operation required is SEARCH. You are given

an arbitrary amount of time to preprocess the n elements so that

SEARCH operations run quickly.

a. Show how to implement SEARCH in O(lg n) worst-case time using no

extra storage beyond what is needed to store the elements of the set
themselves.

b. Consider implementing the set by open-address hashing on m slots,

and assume independent uniform permutation hashing. What is the

minimum amount of extra storage m - n required to make the

average performance of an unsuccessful SEARCH operation be at
least as good as the bound in part (a)? Your answer should be an

asymptotic bound on m - n in terms of n.

11-3 Slot-size bound for chaining
Given a hash table with n slots, with collisions resolved by chaining,
suppose that n keys are inserted into the table. Each key is equally likely
to be hashed to each slot. Let M be the maximum number of keys in

any slot after all the keys have been inserted. Your mission is to prove

an O(lg n / lg lg n) upper bound on E[M], the expected value of M.

a. Argue that the probability Qk that exactly k keys hash to a particular

slot is given by

b. Let Pk be the probability that M = k, that is, the probability that the
slot containing the most keys contains k keys. Show that Pk nQk.

c. Show that Qk < ek/kk. Hint: Use Stirling's approximation, equation

(3.25) on page 67.

d. Show that there exists a constant c > 1 such that for k0 =

c lg n / lg lg n. Conclude that Pk < 1/n2 for k k0 = c lg n / lg lg n.

e. Argue that

Conclude that E[M] = O(lg n / lg lg n).

11-4 Hashing and authentication
Let H be a family of hash functions in which each hash function h
H maps the universe U of keys to {0, 1, ..., m - 1}.

a. Show that if the family H of hash functions is 2-independent, then it

is universal.

b. Suppose that the universe U is the set of n-tuples of values drawn
from p = {0, 1, ..., p - 1}, where p is prime. Consider an element x =
x0, x1, ..., xn-1 U. For any n-tuple a = a0, a1, ..., an-1 U,
define the hash function ha by

Let H = {ha : a U}. Show that H is universal, but not 2-
independent. (Hint: Find a key for which all hash functions in H

produce the same value.)

c. Suppose that we modify H slightly from part (b): for any a U and
for any b p, define

and . Argue that H is 2-independent.

(Hint: Consider fixed n-tuples x U and y U, with xi yi for some i.

What happens to and as ai and b range over p?)

d. Alice and Bob secretly agree on a hash function h from a 2-
independent family H of hash functions. Each h H maps from a
universe of keys U to p, where p is prime. Later, Alice sends a
message m to Bob over the internet, where m U. She authenticates
this message to Bob by also sending an authentication tag t = h(m),
and Bob checks that the pair (m, t) he receives indeed satisfies t =
h(m). Suppose that an adversary intercepts (m, t) en route and tries to
fool Bob by replacing the pair (m, t) with a different pair (m, t).

Argue that the probability that the adversary succeeds in fooling Bob

into accepting (m, t) is at most 1/p, no matter how much computing

power the adversary has, even if the adversary knows the family H of

hash functions used.

Chapter notes

The books by Knuth [261] and Gonnet and Baeza-Yates [193] are
excellent references for the analysis of hashing algorithms. Knuth
credits H. P. Luhn (1953) for inventing hash tables, along with the
chaining method for resolving collisions. At about the same time, G. M.
Amdahl originated the idea of open addressing. The notion of a
random oracle was introduced by Bellare et al. [43]. Carter and
Wegman [80] introduced the notion of universal families of hash
functions in 1979.

Dietzfelbinger et al. [113] invented the multiply-shift hash function
and gave a proof of Theorem 11.5. Thorup [437] provides extensions
and additional analysis. Thorup [438] gives a simple proof that linear
probing with 5-independent hashing takes constant expected time per
operation. Thorup also describes the method for deletion in a hash
table using linear probing.

Fredman, Komlós, and Szemerédi [154] developed a perfect hashing
scheme for static sets--"perfect" because all collisions are avoided. An
extension of their method to dynamic sets, handling insertions and

deletions in amortized expected time O(1), has been given by

Dietzfelbinger et al. [114].
The wee hash function is based on the RC6 encryption algorithm

[379]. Leiserson et al. [292] propose an "RC6MIX" function that is
essentially the same as the wee hash function. They give experimental
evidence that it has good randomness, and they also give a "DOTMIX"
function for dealing with variable-length inputs. Bellare et al. [42]
provide an analysis of the security of the cipher-block-chaining message
authentication code. This analysis implies that the wee hash function
has the desired pseudorandomness properties.

1 The definition of "average-case" requires care--are we assuming an input distribution over
the keys, or are we randomizing the choice of hash function itself ? We'll consider both
approaches, but with an emphasis on the use of a randomly chosen hash function.

2 In the literature, a (c/m)-universal hash function is sometimes called c-universal or capproximately universal. We'll stick with the notation (c/m)-universal.

12 Binary Search Trees

The search tree data structure supports each of the dynamic-set
operations listed on page 250: SEARCH, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM,
PREDECESSOR, SUCCESSOR, INSERT, and DELETE. Thus, you
can use a search tree both as a dictionary and as a priority queue.

Basic operations on a binary search tree take time proportional to

the height of the tree. For a complete binary tree with n nodes, such
operations run in (lg n) worst-case time. If the tree is a linear chain of
n nodes, however, the same operations take (n) worst-case time. In

Chapter 13, we'll see a variation of binary search trees, red-black trees,

whose operations guarantee a height of O(lg n). We won't prove it here,
but if you build a binary search tree on a random set of n keys, its
expected height is O(lg n) even if you don't try to limit its height.

After presenting the basic properties of binary search trees, the
following sections show how to walk a binary search tree to print its
values in sorted order, how to search for a value in a binary search tree,
how to find the minimum or maximum element, how to find the
predecessor or successor of an element, and how to insert into or delete
from a binary search tree. The basic mathematical properties of trees
appear in Appendix B.