12.1 What is a binary search tree?

A binary search tree is organized, as the name suggests, in a binary tree,
as shown in Figure 12.1. You can represent such a tree with a linked

data structure, as in Section 10.3. In addition to a key and satellite data,
each node object contains attributes left, right, and p that point to the

nodes corresponding to its left child, its right child, and its parent,

respectively. If a child or the parent is missing, the appropriate attribute

contains the value NIL. The tree itself has an attribute root that points
to the root node, or NIL if the tree is empty. The root node T.root is the
only node in a tree T whose parent is NIL.

Figure 12.1 Binary search trees. For any node x, the keys in the left subtree of x are at most
x.key, and the keys in the right subtree of x are at least x.key. Different binary search trees

can represent the same set of values. The worst-case running time for most search-tree
operations is proportional to the height of the tree. (a) A binary search tree on 6 nodes with
height 2. The top figure shows how to view the tree conceptually, and the bottom figure shows

the left, right, and p attributes in each node, in the style of Figure 10.6 on page 266. (b) A less

efficient binary search tree, with height 4, that contains the same keys.

The keys in a binary search tree are always stored in such a way as

to satisfy the binary-search-tree property:

Let x be a node in a binary search tree. If y is a node in the left
subtree of x, then y.key x.key. If y is a node in the right
subtree of x, then y.key x.key.

Thus, in Figure 12.1(a), the key of the root is 6, the keys 2, 5, and 5
in its left subtree are no larger than 6, and the keys 7 and 8 in its right
subtree are no smaller than 6. The same property holds for every node
in the tree. For example, looking at the root's left child as the root of a
subtree, this subtree root has the key 5, the key 2 in its left subtree is no
larger than 5, and the key 5 in its right subtree is no smaller than 5.

Because of the binary-search-tree property, you can print out all the
keys in a binary search tree in sorted order by a simple recursive

algorithm, called an inorder tree walk, given by the procedure

INORDER-TREE-WALK. This algorithm is so named because it
prints the key of the root of a subtree between printing the values in its

left subtree and printing those in its right subtree. (Similarly, a preorder
tree walk prints the root before the values in either subtree, and a
postorder tree walk prints the root after the values in its subtrees.) To
print all the elements in a binary search tree T, call INORDER-TREEWALK(T.root). For example, the inorder tree walk prints the keys in

each of the two binary search trees from Figure 12.1 in the order 2, 5, 5,
6, 7, 8. The correctness of the algorithm follows by induction directly
from the binary-search-tree property.

INORDER-TREE-WALK(x)
1 if x NIL
2 INORDER-TREE-WALK(x.left)
3 print x.key
4 INORDER-TREE-WALK(x.right)

It takes (n) time to walk an n-node binary search tree, since after

the initial call, the procedure calls itself recursively exactly twice for
each node in the tree--once for its left child and once for its right child.
The following theorem gives a formal proof that it takes linear time to
perform an inorder tree walk.

Theorem 12.1
If x is the root of an n-node subtree, then the call INORDER-TREEWALK(x) takes (n) time.

Proof Let T(n) denote the time taken by INORDER-TREE-WALK
when it is called on the root of an n-node subtree. Since INORDERTREE-WALK visits all n nodes of the subtree, we have T(n) = (n). It
remains to show that T(n) = O(n).

Since INORDER-TREE-WALK takes a small, constant amount of

time on an empty subtree (for the test x NIL), we have T(0) = c for
some constant c > 0.

For n > 0, suppose that INORDER-TREE-WALK is called on a
node x whose left subtree has k nodes and whose right subtree has n -
k - 1 nodes. The time to perform INORDER-TREE-WALK(x) is
bounded by T(n) T(k) + T(n - k - 1) + d for some constant d > 0 that

reflects an upper bound on the time to execute the body of INORDER-

TREE-WALK(x), exclusive of the time spent in recursive calls.
We use the substitution method to show that T(n) = O(n) by proving

that T(n) (c + d)n + c. For n = 0, we have (c + d) · 0 + c = c = T(0). For
n > 0, we have

T(n) T(k) + T(n - k - 1) + d
((c + d)k + c) + ((c + d)(n - k - 1) + c) + d
= (c + d)n + c - (c + d) + c + d
= (c + d)n + c,

which completes the proof.

Exercises

12.1-1

For the set {1, 4, 5, 10, 16, 17, 21} of keys, draw binary search trees of
heights 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6.

12.1-2

What is the difference between the binary-search-tree property and the
min-heap property on page 163? Can the min-heap property be used to

print out the keys of an n-node tree in sorted order in O(n) time? Show

how, or explain why not.

12.1-3

Give a nonrecursive algorithm that performs an inorder tree walk.

(Hint: An easy solution uses a stack as an auxiliary data structure. A

more complicated, but elegant, solution uses no stack but assumes that
you can test two pointers for equality.)

12.1-4

Give recursive algorithms that perform preorder and postorder tree

walks in (n) time on a tree of n nodes.

12.1-5
Argue that since sorting n elements takes (n lg n) time in the worst

case in the comparison model, any comparison-based algorithm for

constructing a binary search tree from an arbitrary list of n elements
takes (n lg n) time in the worst case.