12.2 Querying a binary search tree

Binary search trees can support the queries MINIMUM, MAXIMUM,
SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR, as well as SEARCH. This section

examines these operations and shows how to support each one in O(h)
time on any binary search tree of height h.

Searching

To search for a node with a given key in a binary search tree, call the

TREE-SEARCH procedure. Given a pointer x to the root of a subtree
and a key k, TREE-SEARCH(x, k) returns a pointer to a node with key
k if one exists in the subtree; otherwise, it returns NIL. To search for
key k in the entire binary search tree T, call TREE-SEARCH(T.root, k).

TREE-SEARCH(x, k)
1 if x == NIL or k == x.key
2 return x
3 if k < x.key
4 return TREE-SEARCH(x.left, k)

5 else return TREE-SEARCH(x.right, k)

ITERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH(x, k)

1 while x NIL and k x.key

2 if k < x.key

3 x = x.left

4 else x = x.right

5 return x

The TREE-SEARCH procedure begins its search at the root and

traces a simple path downward in the tree, as shown in Figure 12.2(a).

For each node x it encounters, it compares the key k with x.key. If the
two keys are equal, the search terminates. If k is smaller than x.key, the
search continues in the left subtree of x, since the binary-search-tree
property implies that k cannot reside in the right subtree.
Symmetrically, if k is larger than x.key, the search continues in the right

subtree. The nodes encountered during the recursion form a simple

path downward from the root of the tree, and thus the running time of

TREE-SEARCH is O(h), where h is the height of the tree.

Figure 12.2 Queries on a binary search tree. Nodes and paths followed in each query are
colored blue. (a) A search for the key 13 in the tree follows the path 15 6 7 13 from

the root. (b) The minimum key in the tree is 2, which is found by following left pointers from
the root. The maximum key 20 is found by following right pointers from the root. (c) The

successor of the node with key 15 is the node with key 17, since it is the minimum key in the
right subtree of 15. (d) The node with key 13 has no right subtree, and thus its successor is its
lowest ancestor whose left child is also an ancestor. In this case, the node with key 15 is its
successor.

Since the TREE-SEARCH procedure recurses on either the left
subtree or the right subtree, but not both, we can rewrite the algorithm
to "unroll" the recursion into a while loop. On most computers, the
ITERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH procedure on the facing page is more
efficient.

Minimum and maximum

To find an element in a binary search tree whose key is a minimum, just

follow left child pointers from the root until you encounter a NIL, as

shown in Figure 12.2(b). The TREE-MINIMUM procedure returns a

pointer to the minimum element in the subtree rooted at a given node x,

which we assume to be non-NIL.

TREE-MINIMUM(x)
1while x.left NIL
2 x = x.left
3return x

TREE-MAXIMUM(x)
1while x.right NIL
2 x = x.right
3return x

The binary-search-tree property guarantees that TREE-

MINIMUM is correct. If node x has no left subtree, then since every
key in the right subtree of x is at least as large as x.key, the minimum
key in the subtree rooted at x is x.key. If node x has a left subtree, then
since no key in the right subtree is smaller than x.key and every key in
the left subtree is not larger than x.key, the minimum key in the subtree
rooted at x resides in the subtree rooted at x.left.

The pseudocode for TREE-MAXIMUM is symmetric. Both TREE-

MINIMUM and TREE-MAXIMUM run in O(h) time on a tree of
height h since, as in TREE-SEARCH, the sequence of nodes

encountered forms a simple path downward from the root.

Successor and predecessor

Given a node in a binary search tree, how can you find its successor in
the sorted order determined by an inorder tree walk? If all keys are

distinct, the successor of a node x is the node with the smallest key
greater than x.key. Regardless of whether the keys are distinct, we
define the successor of a node as the next node visited in an inorder tree

walk. The structure of a binary search tree allows you to determine the

successor of a node without comparing keys. The TREE-SUCCESSOR

procedure on the facing page returns the successor of a node x in a
binary search tree if it exists, or NIL if x is the last node that would be

visited during an inorder walk.

The code for TREE-SUCCESSOR has two cases. If the right subtree

of node x is nonempty, then the successor of x is just the leftmost node
in x's right subtree, which line 2 finds by calling TREEMINIMUM(x.right). For example, the successor of the node with key

15 in Figure 12.2(c) is the node with key 17.

On the other hand, as Exercise 12.2-6 asks you to show, if the right

subtree of node x is empty and x has a successor y, then y is the lowest
ancestor of x whose left child is also an ancestor of x. In Figure 12.2(d),
the successor of the node with key 13 is the node with key 15. To find y,
go up the tree from x until you encounter either the root or a node that

is the left child of its parent. Lines 48 of TREE-SUCCESSOR handle

this case.

TREE-SUCCESSOR(x)

1 if x.right NIL
2 return TREE-MINIMUM(x.right) // leftmost node in right

subtree

3 else // find the lowest ancestor of x whose left child is an ancestor of

x

4 y = x.p

5 while y NIL and x == y.right

6 x=y

7 y = y.p

8 return y

The running time of TREE-SUCCESSOR on a tree of height h is
O(h), since it either follows a simple path up the tree or follows a simple

path down the tree. The procedure TREE-PREDECESSOR, which is

symmetric to TREE-SUCCESSOR, also runs in O(h) time.

In summary, we have proved the following theorem.

Theorem 12.2

The dynamic-set operations SEARCH, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM,
SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR can be implemented so that each

one runs in O(h) time on a binary search tree of height h.

Exercises

12.2-1

You are searching for the number 363 in a binary search tree containing

numbers between 1 and 1000. Which of the following sequences cannot

be the sequence of nodes examined?

a. 2, 252, 401, 398, 330, 344, 397, 363.

b. 924, 220, 911, 244, 898, 258, 362, 363.

c. 925, 202, 911, 240, 912, 245, 363.

d. 2, 399, 387, 219, 266, 382, 381, 278, 363.

e. 935, 278, 347, 621, 299, 392, 358, 363.

12.2-2

Write recursive versions of TREE-MINIMUM and TREEMAXIMUM.

12.2-3

Write the TREE-PREDECESSOR procedure.

12.2-4

Professor Kilmer claims to have discovered a remarkable property of

binary search trees. Suppose that the search for key k in a binary search
tree ends up at a leaf. Consider three sets: A, the keys to the left of the
search path; B, the keys on the search path; and C, the keys to the right
of the search path. Professor Kilmer claims that any three keys a A, b
B, and c C must satisfy a b c. Give a smallest possible

counterexample to the professor's claim.

12.2-5

Show that if a node in a binary search tree has two children, then its
successor has no left child and its predecessor has no right child.

12.2-6
Consider a binary search tree T whose keys are distinct. Show that if
the right subtree of a node x in T is empty and x has a successor y, then
y is the lowest ancestor of x whose left child is also an ancestor of x.

(Recall that every node is its own ancestor.)

12.2-7
An alternative method of performing an inorder tree walk of an n-node

binary search tree finds the minimum element in the tree by calling

TREE-MINIMUM and then making n - 1 calls to TREESUCCESSOR. Prove that this algorithm runs in (n) time.

12.2-8
Prove that no matter what node you start at in a height-h binary search
tree, k successive calls to TREE-SUCCESSOR take O(k + h) time.

12.2-9
Let T be a binary search tree whose keys are distinct, let x be a leaf
node, and let y be its parent. Show that y.key is either the smallest key in
T larger than x.key or the largest key in T smaller than x.key.