12.3 Insertion and deletion

The operations of insertion and deletion cause the dynamic set
represented by a binary search tree to change. The data structure must
be modified to reflect this change, but in such a way that the binarysearch-tree property continues to hold. We'll see that modifying the tree
to insert a new element is relatively straightforward, but deleting a node
from a binary search tree is more complicated.

Insertion

The TREE-INSERT procedure inserts a new node into a binary search

tree. The procedure takes a binary search tree T and a node z for which

z.key has already been filled in, z.left = NIL, and z.right = NIL. It
modifies T and some of the attributes of z so as to insert z into an

appropriate position in the tree.

TREE-INSERT(T, z)

1x = T.root // node being compared with z
2y = NIL // y will be parent of z

3while x NIL // descend until reaching a leaf
4 y=x
5 if z.key < x.key // found the location--insert z with parent y
6 x = x.left // tree T was empty
7 else x = x.right
8z.p = y

9if y == NIL
10 T.root = z

11elseif z.key < y.key
12 y.left = z
13else y.right = z

Figure 12.3 shows how TREE-INSERT works. Just like the

procedures TREE-SEARCH and ITERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH,

TREE-INSERT begins at the root of the tree and the pointer x traces a

simple path downward looking for a NIL to replace with the input node

z. The procedure maintains the trailing pointer y as the parent of x.

After initialization, the while loop in lines 37 causes these two pointers

to move down the tree, going left or right depending on the comparison

of z.key with x.key, until x becomes NIL. This NIL occupies the
position where node z will go. More precisely, this NIL is a left or right
attribute of the node that will become z's parent, or it is T.root if tree T
is currently empty. The procedure needs the trailing pointer y, because
by the time it finds the NIL where z belongs, the search has proceeded

one step beyond the node that needs to be changed. Lines 813 set the

pointers that cause z to be inserted.

Figure 12.3 Inserting a node with key 13 into a binary search tree. The simple path from the
root down to the position where the node is inserted is shown in blue. The new node and the
link to its parent are highlighted in orange.

Like the other primitive operations on search trees, the procedure

TREE-INSERT runs in O(h) time on a tree of height h.

Deletion

The overall strategy for deleting a node z from a binary search tree T

has three basic cases and, as we'll see, one of the cases is a bit tricky.

If z has no children, then simply remove it by modifying its parent
to replace z with NIL as its child.

If z has just one child, then elevate that child to take z's position
in the tree by modifying z's parent to replace z by z's child.

If z has two children, find z's successor y--which must belong to
z's right subtree--and move y to take z's position in the tree. The
rest of z's original right subtree becomes y's new right subtree,
and z's left subtree becomes y's new left subtree. Because y is z's
successor, it cannot have a left child, and y's original right child
moves into y's original position, with the rest of y's original right

subtree following automatically. This case is the tricky one

because, as we'll see, it matters whether y is z's right child.

The procedure for deleting a given node z from a binary search tree
T takes as arguments pointers to T and z. It organizes its cases a bit

differently from the three cases outlined previously by considering the
four cases shown in Figure 12.4.

Figure 12.4 Deleting a node z, in blue, from a binary search tree. Node z may be the root, a left
child of node q, or a right child of q. The node that will replace node z in its position in the tree
is colored orange. (a) Node z has no left child. Replace z by its right child r, which may or may
not be NIL. (b) Node z has a left child l but no right child. Replace z by l. (c) Node z has two
children. Its left child is node l, its right child is its successor y (which has no left child), and y's
right child is node x. Replace z by y, updating y's left child to become l, but leaving x as y's
right child. (d) Node z has two children (left child l and right child r), and its successor y r
lies within the subtree rooted at r. First replace y by its own right child x, and set y to be r's
parent. Then set y to be q's child and the parent of l.

If z has no left child, then as in part (a) of the figure, replace z by
its right child, which may or may not be NIL. When z's right child
is NIL, this case deals with the situation in which z has no
children. When z's right child is non-NIL, this case handles the
situation in which z has just one child, which is its right child.

Otherwise, if z has just one child, then that child is a left child. As
in part (b) of the figure, replace z by its left child.

Otherwise, z has both a left and a right child. Find z's successor y,
which lies in z's right subtree and has no left child (see Exercise
12.2-5). Splice node y out of its current location and replace z by
y in the tree. How to do so depends on whether y is z's right child:

If y is z's right child, then as in part (c) of the figure, replace
z by y, leaving y's right child alone.

Otherwise, y lies within z's right subtree but is not z's right
child. In this case, as in part (d) of the figure, first replace y
by its own right child, and then replace z by y.

As part of the process of deleting a node, subtrees need to move
around within the binary search tree. The subroutine TRANSPLANT
replaces one subtree as a child of its parent with another subtree. When

TRANSPLANT replaces the subtree rooted at node u with the subtree
rooted at node v, node u's parent becomes node v's parent, and u's
parent ends up having v as its appropriate child. TRANSPLANT allows
v to be NIL instead of a pointer to a node.

TRANSPLANT(T, u, v)

1 if u.p == NIL
2 T.root = v
3 elseif u == u.p.left
4 u.p.left = v
5 else u.p.right = v
6 if v NIL
7 v.p = u.p

Here is how TRANSPLANT works. Lines 12 handle the case in

which u is the root of T. Otherwise, u is either a left child or a right child
of its parent. Lines 34 take care of updating u.p.left if u is a left child,
and line 5 updates u.p.right if u is a right child. Because v may be NIL,
lines 67 update v.p only if v is non-NIL. The procedure
TRANSPLANT does not attempt to update v.left and v.right. Doing so,

or not doing so, is the responsibility of TRANSPLANT's caller.

The procedure TREE-DELETE on the facing page uses

TRANSPLANT to delete node z from binary search tree T. It executes
the four cases as follows. Lines 12 handle the case in which node z has
no left child (Figure 12.4(a)), and lines 34 handle the case in which z

has a left child but no right child (Figure 12.4(b)). Lines 512 deal with

the remaining two cases, in which z has two children. Line 5 finds node
y, which is the successor of z. Because z has a nonempty right subtree,

its successor must be the node in that subtree with the smallest key;

hence the call to TREE-MINIMUM(z.right). As we noted before, y has
no left child. The procedure needs to splice y out of its current location
and replace z by y in the tree. If y is z's right child (Figure 12.4(c)), then
lines 1012 replace z as a child of its parent by y and replace y's left
child by z's left child. Node y retains its right child (x in Figure 12.4(c)),
and so no change to y.right needs to occur. If y is not z's right child
(Figure 12.4(d)), then two nodes have to move. Lines 79 replace y as a
child of its parent by y's right child (x in Figure 12.4(c)) and make z's
right child (r in the figure) become y's right child instead. Finally, lines
1012 replace z as a child of its parent by y and replace y's left child by
z's left child.

TREE-DELETE(T, z)

1if z.left == NIL

2 TRANSPLANT(T, z, z.right) // replace z by its right child

3elseif z.right == NIL // replace z by its left child
// y is z's successor
4 TRANSPLANT(T, z, z.left) // is y farther down the tree?
// replace y by its right child
5else y = TREE-MINIMUM(z.right)

6 if y z.right

7 TRANSPLANT(T, y, y.right)

8 y.right = z.right // z's right child becomes
9 y.right.p = y // y's right child
10 TRANSPLANT(T, z, y) // replace z by its successor y
11 y.left = z.left // and give z's left child to y,
12 y.left.p = y
// which had no left child

Each line of TREE-DELETE, including the calls to TRANSPLANT,
takes constant time, except for the call to TREE-MINIMUM in line 5.

Thus, TREE-DELETE runs in O(h) time on a tree of height h.

In summary, we have proved the following theorem.

Theorem 12.3

The dynamic-set operations INSERT and DELETE can be

implemented so that each one runs in O(h) time on a binary search tree
of height h.

Exercises

12.3-1

Give a recursive version of the TREE-INSERT procedure.

12.3-2

Suppose that you construct a binary search tree by repeatedly inserting
distinct values into the tree. Argue that the number of nodes examined
in searching for a value in the tree is 1 plus the number of nodes
examined when the value was first inserted into the tree.

12.3-3
You can sort a given set of n numbers by first building a binary search

tree containing these numbers (using TREE-INSERT repeatedly to
insert the numbers one by one) and then printing the numbers by an
inorder tree walk. What are the worst-case and best-case running times
for this sorting algorithm?

12.3-4

When TREE-DELETE calls TRANSPLANT, under what

circumstances can the parameter v of TRANSPLANT be NIL?

12.3-5
Is the operation of deletion "commutative" in the sense that deleting x
and then y from a binary search tree leaves the same tree as deleting y
and then x? Argue why it is or give a counterexample.

12.3-6
Suppose that instead of each node x keeping the attribute x.p, pointing
to x's parent, it keeps x.succ, pointing to x's successor. Give pseudocode

for TREE-SEARCH, TREE-INSERT, and TREE-DELETE on a binary

search tree T using this representation. These procedures should
operate in O(h) time, where h is the height of the tree T. You may
assume that all keys in the binary search tree are distinct. (Hint: You

might wish to implement a subroutine that returns the parent of a
node.)

12.3-7
When node z in TREE-DELETE has two children, you can choose node
y to be its predecessor rather than its successor. What other changes to

TREE-DELETE are necessary if you do so? Some have argued that a
fair strategy, giving equal priority to predecessor and successor, yields
better empirical performance. How might TREE-DELETE be minimally
changed to implement such a fair strategy?

Problems

12-1 Binary search trees with equal keys

Equal keys pose a problem for the implementation of binary search
trees.

a. What is the asymptotic performance of TREE-INSERT when used to
insert n items with identical keys into an initially empty binary search

tree?

Consider changing TREE-INSERT to test whether z.key = x.key before
line 5 and to test whether z.key = y.key before line 11. If equality holds,

implement one of the following strategies. For each strategy, find the

asymptotic performance of inserting n items with identical keys into an

initially empty binary search tree. (The strategies are described for line

5, which compares the keys of z and x. Substitute y for x to arrive at the

strategies for line 11.)

b. Keep a boolean flag x.b at node x, and set x to either x.left or x.right
based on the value of x.b, which alternates between FALSE and
TRUE each time TREE-INSERT visits x while inserting a node with
the same key as x.

c. Keep a list of nodes with equal keys at x, and insert z into the list.

d. Randomly set x to either x.left or x.right. (Give the worst-case

performance and informally derive the expected running time.)

12-2 Radix trees

Given two strings a = a0a1 ... ap and b = b0b1 ... bq, where each ai and
each bj belongs to some ordered set of characters, we say that string a is
lexicographically less than string b if either

1. there exists an integer j, where 0 j min {p, q}, such that ai =
bi for all i = 0, 1, ..., j - 1 and aj < bj, or

2. p < q and ai = bi for all i = 0, 1, ..., p.

For example, if a and b are bit strings, then 10100 < 10110 by rule 1
(letting j = 3) and 10100 < 101000 by rule 2. This ordering is similar to

that used in English-language dictionaries.

The radix tree data structure shown in Figure 12.5 (also known as a
trie) stores the bit strings 1011, 10, 011, 100, and 0. When searching for
a key a = a0a1 ... ap, go left at a node of depth i if ai = 0 and right if ai
= 1. Let S be a set of distinct bit strings whose lengths sum to n. Show
how to use a radix tree to sort S lexicographically in (n) time. For the

example in Figure 12.5, the output of the sort should be the sequence 0,
011, 10, 100, 1011.

Figure 12.5 A radix tree storing the bit strings 1011, 10, 011, 100, and 0. To determine each
node's key, traverse the simple path from the root to that node. There is no need, therefore, to
store the keys in the nodes. The keys appear here for illustrative purposes only. Keys
corresponding to blue nodes are not in the tree. Such nodes are present only to establish a path
to other nodes.

12-3 Average node depth in a randomly built binary search tree
A randomly built binary search tree on n keys is a binary search tree

created by starting with an empty tree and inserting the keys in random

order, where each of the n! permutations of the keys is equally likely. In

this problem, you will prove that the average depth of a node in a

randomly built binary search tree with n nodes is O(lg n). The technique

reveals a surprising similarity between the building of a binary search
tree and the execution of RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT from Section
7.3.

Denote the depth of any node x in tree T by d(x, T). Then the total
path length P(T) of a tree T is the sum, over all nodes x in T, of d(x, T).
a. Argue that the average depth of a node in T is

Thus, you need to show that the expected value of P(T) is O(n lg n).

b. Let TL and TR denote the left and right subtrees of tree T,
respectively. Argue that if T has n nodes, then
P(T) = P(TL) + P(TR) + n - 1.

c. Let P(n) denote the average total path length of a randomly built
binary search tree with n nodes. Show that

d. Show how to rewrite P(n) as

e. Recalling the alternative analysis of the randomized version of
quicksort given in Problem 7-3, conclude that P(n) = O(n lg n).

Each recursive invocation of randomized quicksort chooses a random
pivot element to partition the set of elements being sorted. Each node
of a binary search tree partitions the set of elements that fall into the
subtree rooted at that node.

f. Describe an implementation of quicksort in which the comparisons to

sort a set of elements are exactly the same as the comparisons to
insert the elements into a binary search tree. (The order in which
comparisons are made may differ, but the same comparisons must
occur.)

12-4 Number of different binary trees
Let bn denote the number of different binary trees with n nodes. In this
problem, you will find a formula for bn, as well as an asymptotic

estimate.

a. Show that b0 = 1 and that, for n 1,

b. Referring to Problem 4-5 on page 121 for the definition of a
generating function, let B(x) be the generating function

Show that B(x) = xB(x)2 + 1, and hence one way to express B(x) in

closed form is

The Taylor expansion of f(x) around the point x = a is given by

where f(k)(x) is the kth derivative of f evaluated at x.
c. Show that

(the nth Catalan number) by using the Taylor expansion of
around x = 0. (If you wish, instead of using the Taylor expansion, you

may use the generalization of the binomial theorem, equation (C.4) on

page 1181, to noninteger exponents n, where for any real number n
and for any integer k, you can interpret to be n(n - 1) ... (n - k +
1)/k! if k 0, and 0 otherwise.)
d. Show that

Chapter notes

Knuth [261] contains a good discussion of simple binary search trees as
well as many variations. Binary search trees seem to have been
independently discovered by a number of people in the late 1950s. Radix
trees are often called "tries," which comes from the middle letters in the

word retrieval. Knuth [261] also discusses them.

Many texts, including the first two editions of this book, describe a
somewhat simpler method of deleting a node from a binary search tree

when both of its children are present. Instead of replacing node z by its
successor y, delete node y but copy its key and satellite data into node z.

The downside of this approach is that the node actually deleted might
not be the node passed to the delete procedure. If other components of
a program maintain pointers to nodes in the tree, they could mistakenly
end up with "stale" pointers to nodes that have been deleted. Although
the deletion method presented in this edition of this book is a bit more

complicated, it guarantees that a call to delete node z deletes node z and
only node z.

Section 14.5 will show how to construct an optimal binary search
tree when you know the search frequencies before constructing the tree.
That is, given the frequencies of searching for each key and the
frequencies of searching for values that fall between keys in the tree, a
set of searches in the constructed binary search tree examines the
minimum number of nodes.

13 Red-Black Trees

Chapter 12 showed that a binary search tree of height h can support any

of the basic dynamic-set operations--such as SEARCH,
PREDECESSOR, SUCCESSOR, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM, INSERT,

and DELETE--in O(h) time. Thus, the set operations are fast if the

height of the search tree is small. If its height is large, however, the set
operations may run no faster than with a linked list. Red-black trees are
one of many search-tree schemes that are "balanced" in order to

guarantee that basic dynamic-set operations take O(lg n) time in the

worst case.