13.2 Rotations

The search-tree operations TREE-INSERT and TREE-DELETE, when

run on a red-black tree with n keys, take O(lg n) time. Because they

modify the tree, the result may violate the red-black properties
enumerated in Section 13.1. To restore these properties, colors and
pointers within nodes need to change.

The pointer structure changes through rotation, which is a local

operation in a search tree that preserves the binary-search-tree
property. Figure 13.2 shows the two kinds of rotations: left rotations and

right rotations. Let's look at a left rotation on a node x, which

transforms the structure on the right side of the figure to the structure

on the left. Node x has a right child y, which must not be T.nil. The left
rotation changes the subtree originally rooted at x by "twisting" the link

between x and y to the left. The new root of the subtree is node y, with
x as y's left child and y's original left child (the subtree represented by
in the figure) as x's right child.

The pseudocode for LEFT-ROTATE appearing on the following

page assumes that x.right T.nil and that the root's parent is T.nil.

Figure 13.3 shows an example of how LEFT-ROTATE modifies a binary

search tree. The code for RIGHT-ROTATE is symmetric. Both LEFT-

ROTATE and RIGHT-ROTATE run in O(1) time. Only pointers are

changed by a rotation, and all other attributes in a node remain the

same.

Figure 13.2 The rotation operations on a binary search tree. The operation LEFT-ROTATE(T,
x) transforms the configuration of the two nodes on the right into the configuration on the left
by changing a constant number of pointers. The inverse operation RIGHT-ROTATE(T, y)

transforms the configuration on the left into the configuration on the right. The letters , , and

represent arbitrary subtrees. A rotation operation preserves the binary-search-tree property:

the keys in precede x.key, which precedes the keys in , which precede y.key, which precedes

the keys in .

LEFT-ROTATE(T, x)

1y = x.right // turn y's left subtree into x's right subtree
2x.right = y.left // if y's left subtree is not empty ...
// ... then x becomes the parent of the subtree's
3if y.left T.nil
4 y.left.p = x

root

5y.p = x.p // x's parent becomes y's parent

6if x.p == T.nil // if x was the root ...

7 T.root = y // ... then y becomes the root

8elseif x ==// otherwise, if x was a left child ...

x.p.left

9 x.p.left = y // ... then y becomes a left child

10else x.p.right = y // otherwise, x was a right child, and now y is

11y.left = x // make x become y's left child

12x.p = y

Exercises

13.2-1

Write pseudocode for RIGHT-ROTATE.

Figure 13.3 An example of how the procedure LEFT-ROTATE(T, x) modifies a binary search

tree. Inorder tree walks of the input tree and the modified tree produce the same listing of key
values.

13.2-2
Argue that in every n-node binary search tree, there are exactly n - 1

possible rotations.

13.2-3
Let a, b, and c be arbitrary nodes in subtrees , , and , respectively, in
the right tree of Figure 13.2. How do the depths of a, b, and c change
when a left rotation is performed on node x in the figure?

13.2-4
Show that any arbitrary n-node binary search tree can be transformed
into any other arbitrary n-node binary search tree using O(n) rotations.
(Hint: First show that at most n - 1 right rotations suffice to transform

the tree into a right-going chain.)

13.2-5
We say that a binary search tree T1 can be right-converted to binary
search tree T2 if it is possible to obtain T2 from T1 via a series of calls
to RIGHT-ROTATE. Give an example of two trees T1 and T2 such that
T1 cannot be right-converted to T2. Then, show that if a tree T1 can be

right-converted to T2, it can be right-converted using O(n2) calls to

RIGHT-ROTATE.