14.3 Elements of dynamic programming

Although you have just seen two complete examples of the dynamicprogramming method, you might still be wondering just when the
method applies. From an engineering perspective, when should you look
for a dynamic-programming solution to a problem? In this section, we'll
examine the two key ingredients that an optimization problem must
have in order for dynamic programming to apply: optimal substructure
and overlapping subproblems. We'll also revisit and discuss more fully
how memoization might help you take advantage of the overlappingsubproblems property in a top-down recursive approach.

Optimal substructure

The first step in solving an optimization problem by dynamic
programming is to characterize the structure of an optimal solution.

Recall that a problem exhibits optimal substructure if an optimal

solution to the problem contains within it optimal solutions to
subproblems. When a problem exhibits optimal substructure, that gives
you a good clue that dynamic programming might apply. (As Chapter
15 discusses, it also might mean that a greedy strategy applies, however.)
Dynamic programming builds an optimal solution to the problem from
optimal solutions to subproblems. Consequently, you must take care to
ensure that the range of subproblems you consider includes those used
in an optimal solution.

Optimal substructure was key to solving both of the previous
problems in this chapter. In Section 14.1, we observed that the optimal

way of cutting up a rod of length n (if Serling Enterprises makes any

cuts at all) involves optimally cutting up the two pieces resulting from
the first cut. In Section 14.2, we noted that an optimal parenthesization

of the matrix chain product AiAi+1 Aj that splits the product
between Ak and Ak+1 contains within it optimal solutions to the
problems of parenthesizing AiAi+1 Ak and Ak+1Ak+2 Aj.

You will find yourself following a common pattern in discovering
optimal substructure:

1. You show that a solution to the problem consists of making a
choice, such as choosing an initial cut in a rod or choosing an
index at which to split the matrix chain. Making this choice
leaves one or more subproblems to be solved.

2. You suppose that for a given problem, you are given the choice
that leads to an optimal solution. You do not concern yourself
yet with how to determine this choice. You just assume that it
has been given to you.

3. Given this choice, you determine which subproblems ensue and
how to best characterize the resulting space of subproblems.

4. You show that the solutions to the subproblems used within an
optimal solution to the problem must themselves be optimal by
using a "cut-and-paste" technique. You do so by supposing that
each of the subproblem solutions is not optimal and then
deriving a contradiction. In particular, by "cutting out" the
nonoptimal solution to each subproblem and "pasting in" the
optimal one, you show that you can get a better solution to the
original problem, thus contradicting your supposition that you
already had an optimal solution. If an optimal solution gives rise
to more than one subproblem, they are typically so similar that
you can modify the cut-and-paste argument for one to apply to
the others with little effort.

To characterize the space of subproblems, a good rule of thumb says
to try to keep the space as simple as possible and then expand it as
necessary. For example, the space of subproblems for the rod-cutting
problem contained the problems of optimally cutting up a rod of length

i for each size i. This subproblem space worked well, and it was not

necessary to try a more general space of subproblems.
Conversely, suppose that you tried to constrain the subproblem

space for matrix-chain multiplication to matrix products of the form

A1A2 Aj. As before, an optimal parenthesization must split this
product between Ak and Ak+1 for some 1 k < j. Unless you can
guarantee that k always equals j - 1, you will find that you have
subproblems of the form A1A2 Ak and Ak+1Ak+2 Aj. Moreover,
the latter subproblem does not have the form A1A2 Aj. To solve this

problem by dynamic programming, you need to allow the subproblems

to vary at "both ends." That is, both i and j need to vary in the
subproblem of parenthesizing the product AiAi+1 Aj.

Optimal substructure varies across problem domains in two ways:

1. how many subproblems an optimal solution to the original
problem uses, and

2. how many choices you have in determining which subproblem(s)
to use in an optimal solution.

In the rod-cutting problem, an optimal solution for cutting up a rod of

size n uses just one subproblem (of size n - i), but we have to consider n
choices for i in order to determine which one yields an optimal solution.
Matrix-chain multiplication for the subchain AiAi+1 Aj serves an
example with two subproblems and j - i choices. For a given matrix Ak

where the product splits, two subproblems arise--parenthesizing

AiAi+1 Ak and parenthesizing Ak+1Ak+2 Aj--and we have to
solve both of them optimally. Once we determine the optimal solutions
to subproblems, we choose from among j - i candidates for the index k.

Informally, the running time of a dynamic-programming algorithm

depends on the product of two factors: the number of subproblems

overall and how many choices you look at for each subproblem. In rod

cutting, we had (n) subproblems overall, and at most n choices to
examine for each, yielding an O(n2) running time. Matrix-chain
multiplication had (n2) subproblems overall, and each had at most n -
1 choices, giving an O(n3) running time (actually, a (n3) running time,

by Exercise 14.2-5).

Usually, the subproblem graph gives an alternative way to perform

the same analysis. Each vertex corresponds to a subproblem, and the

choices for a subproblem are the edges incident from that subproblem.

Recall that in rod cutting, the subproblem graph has n vertices and at
most n edges per vertex, yielding an O(n2) running time. For matrix-

chain multiplication, if you were to draw the subproblem graph, it

would have (n2) vertices and each vertex would have degree at most n
- 1, giving a total of O(n3) vertices and edges.

Dynamic programming often uses optimal substructure in a bottom-

up fashion. That is, you first find optimal solutions to subproblems and,

having solved the subproblems, you find an optimal solution to the

problem. Finding an optimal solution to the problem entails making a

choice among subproblems as to which you will use in solving the

problem. The cost of the problem solution is usually the subproblem

costs plus a cost that is directly attributable to the choice itself. In rod

cutting, for example, first we solved the subproblems of determining

optimal ways to cut up rods of length i for i = 0, 1, ..., n - 1, and then

we determined which of these subproblems yielded an optimal solution

for a rod of length n, using equation (14.2). The cost attributable to the
choice itself is the term pi in equation (14.2). In matrix-chain

multiplication, we determined optimal parenthesizations of subchains of

AiAi+1 Aj, and then we chose the matrix Ak at which to split the
product. The cost attributable to the choice itself is the term pi-1 pk pj.

Chapter 15 explores "greedy algorithms," which have many
similarities to dynamic programming. In particular, problems to which
greedy algorithms apply have optimal substructure. One major
difference between greedy algorithms and dynamic programming is that
instead of first finding optimal solutions to subproblems and then
making an informed choice, greedy algorithms first make a "greedy"
choice--the choice that looks best at the time--and then solve a
resulting subproblem, without bothering to solve all possible related
smaller subproblems. Surprisingly, in some cases this strategy works!

Subtleties

You should be careful not to assume that optimal substructure applies
when it does not. Consider the following two problems whose input

consists of a directed graph G = (V, E) and vertices u, v V.

Unweighted shortest path:5 Find a path from u to v consisting of the

fewest edges. Such a path must be simple, since removing a cycle from
a path produces a path with fewer edges.

Unweighted longest simple path: Find a simple path from u to v

consisting of the most edges. (Without the requirement that the path
must be simple, the problem is undefined, since repeatedly traversing a
cycle creates paths with an arbitrarily large number of edges.)

The unweighted shortest-path problem exhibits optimal

substructure. Here's how. Suppose that u v, so that the problem is
nontrivial. Then, any path p from u to v must contain an intermediate
vertex, say w. (Note that w may be u or v.) Then, we can decompose the

path into subpaths . The number of edges in p equals

the number of edges in p1 plus the number of edges in p2. We claim that

if p is an optimal (i.e., shortest) path from u to v, then p1 must be a

shortest path from u to w. Why? As suggested earlier, use a "cut-and-

paste" argument: if there were another path, say , from u to w with

fewer edges than p1, then we could cut out p1 and paste in to

produce a path with fewer edges than p, thus contradicting

p's optimality. Likewise, p2 must be a shortest path from w to v. Thus, to

find a shortest path from u to v, consider all intermediate vertices w,

find a shortest path from u to w and a shortest path from w to v, and

choose an intermediate vertex w that yields the overall shortest path.

Section 23.2 uses a variant of this observation of optimal substructure

to find a shortest path between every pair of vertices on a weighted,

directed graph.

You might be tempted to assume that the problem of finding an

unweighted longest simple path exhibits optimal substructure as well.

After all, if we decompose a longest simple path into subpaths

, then mustn't p1 be a longest simple path from u to w, and

mustn't p2 be a longest simple path from w to v? The answer is no!

Figure 14.6 supplies an example. Consider the path q r t, which is

a longest simple path from q to t. Is q r a longest simple path from q

to r? No, for the path q s t r is a simple path that is longer. Is r

t a longest simple path from r to t? No again, for the path r q s

t is a simple path that is longer.

Figure 14.6 A directed graph showing that the problem of finding a longest simple path in an

unweighted directed graph does not have optimal substructure. The path q r t is a
longest simple path from q to t, but the subpath q r is not a longest simple path from q to r,
nor is the subpath r t a longest simple path from r to t.

This example shows that for longest simple paths, not only does the

problem lack optimal substructure, but you cannot necessarily assemble

a "legal" solution to the problem from solutions to subproblems. If you

combine the longest simple paths q s t r and r q s t,
you get the path q s t r q s t, which is not simple.

Indeed, the problem of finding an unweighted longest simple path does

not appear to have any sort of optimal substructure. No efficient

dynamic-programming algorithm for this problem has ever been found.

In fact, this problem is NP-complete, which--as we shall see in Chapter

34--means that we are unlikely to find a way to solve it in polynomial

time.

Why is the substructure of a longest simple path so different from

that of a shortest path? Although a solution to a problem for both

longest and shortest paths uses two subproblems, the subproblems in

finding the longest simple path are not independent, whereas for

shortest paths they are. What do we mean by subproblems being

independent? We mean that the solution to one subproblem does not

affect the solution to another subproblem of the same problem. For the

example of Figure 14.6, we have the problem of finding a longest simple

path from q to t with two subproblems: finding longest simple paths
from q to r and from r to t. For the first of these subproblems, we chose
the path q s t r, which used the vertices s and t. These vertices

cannot appear in a solution to the second subproblem, since the

combination of the two solutions to subproblems yields a path that is

not simple. If vertex t cannot be in the solution to the second problem,
then there is no way to solve it, since t is required to be on the path that

forms the solution, and it is not the vertex where the subproblem

solutions are "spliced" together (that vertex being r). Because vertices s
and t appear in one subproblem solution, they cannot appear in the

other subproblem solution. One of them must be in the solution to the

other subproblem, however, and an optimal solution requires both.

Thus, we say that these subproblems are not independent. Looked at

another way, using resources in solving one subproblem (those

resources being vertices) renders them unavailable for the other

subproblem.

Why, then, are the subproblems independent for finding a shortest

path? The answer is that by nature, the subproblems do not share

resources. We claim that if a vertex w is on a shortest path p from u to v,

then we can splice together any shortest path and any shortest

path to produce a shortest path from u to v. We are assured that,

other than w, no vertex can appear in both paths p1 and p2. Why?

Suppose that some vertex x w appears in both p1 and p2, so that we

can decompose p1 as and p2 as . By the optimal

substructure of this problem, path p has as many edges as p1 and p2

together. Let's say that p has e edges. Now let us construct a path

from u to v. Because we have excised the paths from x

to w and from w to x, each of which contains at least one edge, path p

contains at most e - 2 edges, which contradicts the assumption that p is

a shortest path. Thus, we are assured that the subproblems for the

shortest-path problem are independent.

The two problems examined in Sections 14.1 and 14.2 have

independent subproblems. In matrix-chain multiplication, the

subproblems are multiplying subchains AiAi+1 Ak and Ak+1Ak+2

Aj. These subchains are disjoint, so that no matrix could possibly be

included in both of them. In rod cutting, to determine the best way to

cut up a rod of length n, we looked at the best ways of cutting up rods

of length i for i = 0, 1, ..., n - 1. Because an optimal solution to the

length-n problem includes just one of these subproblem solutions (after

cutting off the first piece), independence of subproblems is not an issue.

Overlapping subproblems

The second ingredient that an optimization problem must have for
dynamic programming to apply is that the space of subproblems must
be "small" in the sense that a recursive algorithm for the problem solves
the same subproblems over and over, rather than always generating new
subproblems. Typically, the total number of distinct subproblems is a
polynomial in the input size. When a recursive algorithm revisits the
same problem repeatedly, we say that the optimization problem has

overlapping subproblems.6 In contrast, a problem for which a divide-

and-conquer approach is suitable usually generates brand-new
problems at each step of the recursion. Dynamic-programming
algorithms typically take advantage of overlapping subproblems by
solving each subproblem once and then storing the solution in a table
where it can be looked up when needed, using constant time per lookup.

Figure 14.7 The recursion tree for the computation of RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, 1,
4). Each node contains the parameters i and j. The computations performed in a subtree

shaded blue are replaced by a single table lookup in MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN.

In Section 14.1, we briefly examined how a recursive solution to rod
cutting makes exponentially many calls to find solutions of smaller
subproblems. The dynamic-programming solution reduces the running
time from the exponential time of the recursive algorithm down to
quadratic time.

To illustrate the overlapping-subproblems property in greater detail,
let's revisit the matrix-chain multiplication problem. Referring back to
Figure 14.5, observe that MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER repeatedly looks
up the solution to subproblems in lower rows when solving subproblems

in higher rows. For example, it references entry m[3, 4] four times:
during the computations of m[2, 4], m[1, 4], m[3, 5], and m[3, 6]. If the
algorithm were to recompute m[3, 4] each time, rather than just looking

it up, the running time would increase dramatically. To see how, consider
the inefficient recursive procedure RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN on

the facing page, which determines m[i, j], the minimum number of scalar

multiplications needed to compute the matrix-chain product Ai:j =
AiAi+1 Aj. The procedure is based directly on the recurrence (14.7).

Figure 14.7 shows the recursion tree produced by the call

RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, 1, 4). Each node is labeled by the
values of the parameters i and j. Observe that some pairs of values

occur many times.

In fact, the time to compute m[1, n] by this recursive procedure is at
least exponential in n. To see why, let T(n) denote the time taken by

RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN to compute an optimal

parenthesization of a chain of n matrices. Because the execution of lines

12 and of lines 67 each take at least unit time, as does the

multiplication in line 5, inspection of the procedure yields the

recurrence

RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, i, j)

1 if i == j

2 return 0

3 m[i, j] =

4 for k = i to j - 1

5 q = RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, i, k)

+ RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, k + 1, j)

+ pi-1 pk pj

6 if q < m[i, j]

7 m[i, j] = q

8 return m[i, j]

Noting that for i = 1, 2, ..., n - 1, each term T(i) appears once as T(k)
and once as T(n - k), and collecting the n - 1 1s in the summation

together with the 1 out front, we can rewrite the recurrence as

Let's prove that T(n) = (2n) using the substitution method.
Specifically, we'll show that T(n) 2n-1 for all n 1. For the base case n
= 1, the summation is empty, and we get T(1) 1 = 20. Inductively, for n

2 we have

which completes the proof. Thus, the total amount of work performed

by the call RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, 1, n) is at least
exponential in n.

Compare this top-down, recursive algorithm (without memoization)
with the bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm. The latter is
more efficient because it takes advantage of the overlapping-

subproblems property. Matrix-chain multiplication has only (n2)

distinct subproblems, and the dynamic-programming algorithm solves
each exactly once. The recursive algorithm, on the other hand, must
solve each subproblem every time it reappears in the recursion tree.
Whenever a recursion tree for the natural recursive solution to a
problem contains the same subproblem repeatedly, and the total
number of distinct subproblems is small, dynamic programming can
improve efficiency, sometimes dramatically.

Reconstructing an optimal solution
As a practical matter, you'll often want to store in a separate table
which choice you made in each subproblem so that you do not have to

reconstruct this information from the table of costs.

For matrix-chain multiplication, the table s[i, j] saves a significant

amount of work when we need to reconstruct an optimal solution.
Suppose that the MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER procedure on page 378

did not maintain the s[i, j] table, so that it filled in only the table m[i, j]

containing optimal subproblem costs. The procedure chooses from

among j - i possibilities when determining which subproblems to use in
an optimal solution to parenthesizing AiAi+1 Aj, and j - i is not a
constant. Therefore, it would take (j -i) = (1) time to reconstruct

which subproblems it chose for a solution to a given problem. Because

MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER stores in s[i, j] the index of the matrix at
which it split the product AiAi+1 Aj, the PRINT-OPTIMALPARENS procedure on page 381 can look up each choice in O(1) time.

Memoization

As we saw for the rod-cutting problem, there is an alternative approach
to dynamic programming that often offers the efficiency of the bottomup dynamic-programming approach while maintaining a top-down

strategy. The idea is to memoize the natural, but inefficient, recursive

algorithm. As in the bottom-up approach, you maintain a table with
subproblem solutions, but the control structure for filling in the table is
more like the recursive algorithm.

A memoized recursive algorithm maintains an entry in a table for the
solution to each subproblem. Each table entry initially contains a
special value to indicate that the entry has yet to be filled in. When the
subproblem is first encountered as the recursive algorithm unfolds, its
solution is computed and then stored in the table. Each subsequent
encounter of this subproblem simply looks up the value stored in the
table and returns it.7

The procedure MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN is a memoized
version of the procedure RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN on page
389. Note where it resembles the memoized top-down method on page
369 for the rod-cutting problem.

MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN(p, n)

1 let m[1 : n, 1 : n] be a new table

2 for i = 1 to n

3 for j = i to n

4 m[i, j] =

5 return LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, 1, n)

LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, i, j)

1 if m[i, j] <

2 return m[i, j]

3 if i == j

4 m[i, j] = 0

5 else for k = i to j - 1

6 q = LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, i, k)

+ LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, k + 1, j) + pi-1 pk pj

7 if q < m[i, j]

8 m[i, j] = q

9 return m[i, j]

The MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN procedure, like the bottom-up

MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER procedure on page 378, maintains a table

m[1 : n, 1 : n] of computed values of m[i, j], the minimum number of
scalar multiplications needed to compute the matrix Ai:j. Each table

entry initially contains the value to indicate that the entry has yet to

be filled in. Upon calling LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, i, j), if line 1 finds that
m[i, j] < , then the procedure simply returns the previously computed
cost m[i, j] in line 2. Otherwise, the cost is computed as in
RECURSIVE-MATRIX-CHAIN, stored in m[i, j], and returned. Thus,
LOOKUP-CHAIN(m, p, i, j) always returns the value of m[i, j], but it

computes it only upon the first call of LOOKUP-CHAIN with these

specific values of i and j. Figure 14.7 illustrates how MEMOIZED-

MATRIX-CHAIN saves time compared with RECURSIVE-MATRIX-

CHAIN. Subtrees shaded blue represent values that are looked up

rather than recomputed.

Like the bottom-up procedure MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER, the

memoized procedure MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN runs in O(n3)

time. To begin with, line 4 of MEMOIZED-MATRIX-CHAIN executes

(n2) times, which dominates the running time outside of the call to

LOOKUP-CHAIN in line 5. We can categorize the calls of LOOKUPCHAIN into two types:

1. calls in which m[i, j] = , so that lines 39 execute, and

2. calls in which m[i, j] < , so that LOOKUP-CHAIN simply

returns in line 2.

There are (n2) calls of the first type, one per table entry. All calls of

the second type are made as recursive calls by calls of the first type.
Whenever a given call of LOOKUP-CHAIN makes recursive calls, it

makes O(n) of them. Therefore, there are O(n3) calls of the second type
in all. Each call of the second type takes O(1) time, and each call of the
first type takes O(n) time plus the time spent in its recursive calls. The
total time, therefore, is O(n3). Memoization thus turns an (2n)-time
algorithm into an O(n3)-time algorithm.

We have seen how to solve the matrix-chain multiplication problem
by either a top-down, memoized dynamic-programming algorithm or a

bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm in O(n3) time. Both the

bottom-up and memoized methods take advantage of the overlapping-

subproblems property. There are only (n2) distinct subproblems in

total, and either of these methods computes the solution to each
subproblem only once. Without memoization, the natural recursive
algorithm runs in exponential time, since solved subproblems are
repeatedly solved.

In general practice, if all subproblems must be solved at least once, a
bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm usually outperforms the
corresponding top-down memoized algorithm by a constant factor,
because the bottom-up algorithm has no overhead for recursion and
less overhead for maintaining the table. Moreover, for some problems
you can exploit the regular pattern of table accesses in the dynamic-

programming algorithm to reduce time or space requirements even
further. On the other hand, in certain situations, some of the
subproblems in the subproblem space might not need to be solved at all.
In that case, the memoized solution has the advantage of solving only
those subproblems that are definitely required.

Exercises

14.3-1

Which is a more efficient way to determine the optimal number of
multiplications in a matrix-chain multiplication problem: enumerating
all the ways of parenthesizing the product and computing the number
of multiplications for each, or running RECURSIVE-MATRIXCHAIN? Justify your answer.

14.3-2

Draw the recursion tree for the MERGE-SORT procedure from Section
2.3.1 on an array of 16 elements. Explain why memoization fails to
speed up a good divide-and-conquer algorithm such as MERGE-SORT.

14.3-3

Consider the antithetical variant of the matrix-chain multiplication
problem where the goal is to parenthesize the sequence of matrices so
as to maximize, rather than minimize, the number of scalar
multiplications. Does this problem exhibit optimal substructure?

14.3-4

As stated, in dynamic programming, you first solve the subproblems
and then choose which of them to use in an optimal solution to the
problem. Professor Capulet claims that she does not always need to
solve all the subproblems in order to find an optimal solution. She
suggests that she can find an optimal solution to the matrix-chain

multiplication problem by always choosing the matrix Ak at which to
split the subproduct AiAi+1 Aj (by selecting k to minimize the
quantity pi-1 pk pj) before solving the subproblems. Find an instance of

the matrix-chain multiplication problem for which this greedy approach
yields a suboptimal solution.

14.3-5
Suppose that the rod-cutting problem of Section 14.1 also had a limit li
on the number of pieces of length i allowed to be produced, for i = 1, 2,
..., n. Show that the optimal-substructure property described in Section

14.1 no longer holds.