14.5 Optimal binary search trees

Suppose that you are designing a program to translate text from
English to Latvian. For each occurrence of each English word in the
text, you need to look up its Latvian equivalent. You can perform these

lookup operations by building a binary search tree with n English words

as keys and their Latvian equivalents as satellite data. Because you will
search the tree for each individual word in the text, you want the total

time spent searching to be as low as possible. You can ensure an O(lg n)

search time per occurrence by using a red-black tree or any other
balanced binary search tree. Words appear with different frequencies,

however, and a frequently used word such as the can end up appearing
far from the root while a rarely used word such as naumachia appears

near the root. Such an organization would slow down the translation,
since the number of nodes visited when searching for a key in a binary
search tree equals 1 plus the depth of the node containing the key. You
want words that occur frequently in the text to be placed nearer the
root.8 Moreover, some words in the text might have no Latvian
translation,9 and such words would not appear in the binary search tree
at all. How can you organize a binary search tree so as to minimize the
number of nodes visited in all searches, given that you know how often
each word occurs?

What you need is an optimal binary search tree. Formally, given a
sequence K = k1, k2, ..., kn of n distinct keys such that k1 < k2 < ... <
kn, build a binary search tree containing them. For each key ki, you are
given the probability pi that any given search is for key ki. Since some
searches may be for values not in K, you also have n + 1 "dummy" keys

d0, d1, d2, ..., dn representing those values. In particular, d0 represents
all values less than k1, dn represents all values greater than kn, and for i
= 1, 2, ..., n - 1, the dummy key di represents all values between ki and
ki+1. For each dummy key di, you have the probability qi that a search
corresponds to di. Figure 14.9 shows two binary search trees for a set of
n = 5 keys. Each key ki is an internal node, and each dummy key di is a
leaf. Since every search is either successful (finding some key ki) or
unsuccessful (finding some dummy key di), we have

Figure 14.9 Two binary search trees for a set of n = 5 keys with the following probabilities:

i 0 1 2 3 4 5

pi 0.15 0.10 0.05 0.10 0.20

qi 0.05 0.10 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.10

(a) A binary search tree with expected search cost 2.80. (b) A binary search tree with
expected search cost 2.75. This tree is optimal.

Knowing the probabilities of searches for each key and each dummy

key allows us to determine the expected cost of a search in a given

binary search tree T. Let us assume that the actual cost of a search

equals the number of nodes examined, which is the depth of the node

found by the search in T, plus 1. Then the expected cost of a search in T

is

where depthT denotes a node's depth in the tree T. The last equation

follows from equation (14.10). Figure 14.9 shows how to calculate the
expected search cost node by node.

For a given set of probabilities, your goal is to construct a binary
search tree whose expected search cost is smallest. We call such a tree

an optimal binary search tree. Figure 14.9(a) shows one binary search

tree, with expected cost 2.80, for the probabilities given in the figure
caption. Part (b) of the figure displays an optimal binary search tree,
with expected cost 2.75. This example demonstrates that an optimal
binary search tree is not necessarily a tree whose overall height is
smallest. Nor does an optimal binary search tree always have the key

with the greatest probability at the root. Here, key k5 has the greatest

search probability of any key, yet the root of the optimal binary search

tree shown is k2. (The lowest expected cost of any binary search tree
with k5 at the root is 2.85.)

As with matrix-chain multiplication, exhaustive checking of all
possibilities fails to yield an efficient algorithm. You can label the nodes

of any n-node binary tree with the keys k1, k2, ..., kn to construct a

binary search tree, and then add in the dummy keys as leaves. In
Problem 12-4 on page 329, we saw that the number of binary trees with

n nodes is (4n/n3/2). Thus you would need to examine an exponential

number of binary search trees to perform an exhaustive search. We'll
see how to solve this problem more efficiently with dynamic
programming.

Step 1: The structure of an optimal binary search tree

To characterize the optimal substructure of optimal binary search trees,
we start with an observation about subtrees. Consider any subtree of a

binary search tree. It must contain keys in a contiguous range ki, ..., kj,
for some 1 i j n. In addition, a subtree that contains keys ki, ..., kj
must also have as its leaves the dummy keys di-1, ..., dj.

Now we can state the optimal substructure: if an optimal binary

search tree T has a subtree T containing keys ki, ..., kj, then this
subtree T must be optimal as well for the subproblem with keys ki, ...,
kj and dummy keys di-1, ..., dj. The usual cut-and-paste argument
applies. If there were a subtree T whose expected cost is lower than
that of T, then cutting T out of T and pasting in T would result in a
binary search tree of lower expected cost than T, thus contradicting the
optimality of T.

With the optimal substructure in hand, here is how to construct an

optimal solution to the problem from optimal solutions to subproblems.

Given keys ki, ..., kj, one of these keys, say kr (i r j), is the root of an
optimal subtree containing these keys. The left subtree of the root kr
contains the keys ki, ..., kr-1 (and dummy keys di-1, ..., dr-1), and the
right subtree contains the keys kr+1, ..., kj (and dummy keys dr, ..., dj).
As long as you examine all candidate roots kr, where i r j, and you
determine all optimal binary search trees containing ki, ..., kr-1 and
those containing kr+1, ..., kj, you are guaranteed to find an optimal

binary search tree.

There is one technical detail worth understanding about "empty"

subtrees. Suppose that in a subtree with keys ki, ..., kj, you select ki as
the root. By the above argument, ki's left subtree contains the keys ki,
..., ki-1: no keys at all. Bear in mind, however, that subtrees also

contain dummy keys. We adopt the convention that a subtree

containing keys ki, ..., ki-1 has no actual keys but does contain the
single dummy key di-1. Symmetrically, if you select kj as the root, then
kj's right subtree contains the keys kj+1, ..., kj. This right subtree
contains no actual keys, but it does contain the dummy key dj.

Step 2: A recursive solution

To define the value of an optimal solution recursively, the subproblem

domain is finding an optimal binary search tree containing the keys ki,
..., kj, where i 1, j n, and j i - 1. (When j = i - 1, there is just the
dummy key di-1, but no actual keys.) Let e[i, j] denote the expected cost
of searching an optimal binary search tree containing the keys ki, ..., kj.
Your goal is to compute e[1, n], the expected cost of searching an

optimal binary search tree for all the actual and dummy keys.

The easy case occurs when j = i - 1. Then the subproblem consists of
just the dummy key di-1. The expected search cost is e[i, i - 1] = qi-1.

When j i, you need to select a root kr from among ki, ..., kj and
then make an optimal binary search tree with keys ki, ..., kr-1 as its left
subtree and an optimal binary search tree with keys kr+1, ..., kj as its

right subtree. What happens to the expected search cost of a subtree
when it becomes a subtree of a node? The depth of each node in the
subtree increases by 1. By equation (14.11), the expected search cost of
this subtree increases by the sum of all the probabilities in the subtree.

For a subtree with keys ki, ..., kj, denote this sum of probabilities as

Thus, if kr is the root of an optimal subtree containing keys ki, ..., kj,

we have

e[i, j] = pr + (e[i, r - 1] + w(i, r - 1)) + (e[r + 1, j] + w(r + 1, j)).

Noting that

w(i, j) = w(i, r - 1) + pr + w(r + 1, j),

we rewrite e[i, j] as

The recursive equation (14.13) assumes that you know which node

kr to use as the root. Of course, you choose the root that gives the

lowest expected search cost, giving the final recursive formulation:

The e[i, j] values give the expected search costs in optimal binary

search trees. To help keep track of the structure of optimal binary

search trees, define root[i, j], for 1 i j n, to be the index r for which
kr is the root of an optimal binary search tree containing keys ki, ..., kj.
Although we'll see how to compute the values of root[i, j], the

construction of an optimal binary search tree from these values is left
as Exercise 14.5-1.

Step 3: Computing the expected search cost of an optimal binary search
tree

At this point, you may have noticed some similarities between our
characterizations of optimal binary search trees and matrix-chain
multiplication. For both problem domains, the subproblems consist of
contiguous index subranges. A direct, recursive implementation of
equation (14.14) would be just as inefficient as a direct, recursive

matrix-chain multiplication algorithm. Instead, you can store the e[i, j]
values in a table e[1 : n + 1, 0 : n]. The first index needs to run to n + 1
rather than n because in order to have a subtree containing only the
dummy key dn, you need to compute and store e[n + 1, n]. The second

index needs to start from 0 because in order to have a subtree

containing only the dummy key d0, you need to compute and store e[1,
0]. Only the entries e[i, j] for which j i - 1 are filled in. The table root[i,
j] records the root of the subtree containing keys ki, ..., kj and uses only
the entries for which 1 i j n.

One other table makes the dynamic-programming algorithm a little

faster. Instead of computing the value of w(i, j) from scratch every time
you compute e[i, j], which would take (j - i) additions, store these

values in a table w[1 : n + 1, 0 : n]. For the base case, compute w[i, i - 1]
= qi-1 for 1 i n + 1. For j i, compute

Thus, you can compute the (n2) values of w[i, j] in (1) time each.

The OPTIMAL-BST procedure on the next page takes as inputs the

probabilities p1, ..., pn and q0, ..., qn and the size n, and it returns the
tables e and root. From the description above and the similarity to the

MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER procedure in Section 14.2, you should find

the operation of this procedure to be fairly straightforward. The for

loop of lines 24 initializes the values of e[i, i - 1]and w[i, i - 1]. Then

the for loop of lines 514 uses the recurrences (14.14) and (14.15) to

compute e[i, j] and w[i, j] for all 1 i j n. In the first iteration, when l
= 1, the loop computes e[i, i] and w[i, i] for i = 1, 2, ..., n. The second
iteration, with l = 2, computes e[i, i + 1] and w[i, i + 1] for i = 1, 2, ..., n -

1, and so on. The innermost for loop, in lines 1014, tries each

candidate index r to determine which key kr to use as the root of an
optimal binary search tree containing keys ki, ..., kj. This for loop saves
the current value of the index r in root[i, j] whenever it finds a better key

to use as the root.

OPTIMAL-BST(p, q, n)

1let e[1 : n + 1, 0 : n], w[1 : n + 1, 0 : n],

and root[1 : n, 1 : n] be new tables

2for i = 1 to n + 1 // base cases

3 e[i, i - 1] = qi-1 // equation (14.14)

4 w[i, i - 1] = qi-1

5for l = 1 to n

6 for i = 1 to n - l + 1

7 j=i+l-1

8 e[i, j] =

9 w[i, j] = w[i, j - 1] + pj + qj // equation (14.15)

10 for r = i to j // try all possible roots r

11 t = e[i, r - 1] + e[r + 1, j] + w[i, j] // equation (14.14)

12 if t < e[i, j] // new minimum?

13 e[i, j] = t

14 root[i, j] = r

15return e and root

Figure 14.10 shows the tables e[i, j], w[i, j], and root[i, j] computed by

the procedure OPTIMAL-BST on the key distribution shown in Figure
14.9. As in the matrix-chain multiplication example of Figure 14.5, the
tables are rotated to make the diagonals run horizontally. OPTIMALBST computes the rows from bottom to top and from left to right
within each row.

The OPTIMAL-BST procedure takes (n3) time, just like MATRIXCHAIN-ORDER. Its running time is O(n3), since its for loops are
nested three deep and each loop index takes on at most n values. The

loop indices in OPTIMAL-BST do not have exactly the same bounds as
those in MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER, but they are within at most 1 in
all directions. Thus, like MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER, the OPTIMAL-

BST procedure takes (n3) time.

Figure 14.10 The tables e[i, j], w[i, j], and root[i, j] computed by OPTIMAL-BST on the key

distribution shown in Figure 14.9. The tables are rotated so that the diagonals run
horizontally.

Exercises

14.5-1

Write pseudocode for the procedure CONSTRUCT-OPTIMAL-

BST(root, n) which, given the table root[1 : n, 1 : n], outputs the

structure of an optimal binary search tree. For the example in Figure
14.10, your procedure should print out the structure

k2 is the root
k1 is the left child of k2
d0 is the left child of k1
d1 is the right child of k1
k5 is the right child of k2

k4 is the left child of k5
k3 is the left child of k4
d2 is the left child of k3
d3 is the right child of k3
d4 is the right child of k4
d5 is the right child of k5

corresponding to the optimal binary search tree shown in Figure
14.9(b).

14.5-2

Determine the cost and structure of an optimal binary search tree for a

set of n = 7 keys with the following probabilities:

i0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

pi 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.02 0.10 0.12 0.14

qi 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05

14.5-3
Suppose that instead of maintaining the table w[i, j], you computed the
value of w(i, j) directly from equation (14.12) in line 9 of OPTIMAL-

BST and used this computed value in line 11. How would this change

affect the asymptotic running time of OPTIMAL-BST?

14.5-4

Knuth [264] has shown that there are always roots of optimal subtrees

such that root[i, j - 1] root[i, j] root[i + 1, j] for all 1 i < j n. Use
this fact to modify the OPTIMAL-BST procedure to run in (n2) time.

Problems

14-1 Longest simple path in a directed acyclic graph
You are given a directed acyclic graph G = (V, E) with real-valued edge
weights and two distinguished vertices s and t. The weight of a path is

the sum of the weights of the edges in the path. Describe a dynamic-

programming approach for finding a longest weighted simple path from

s to t. What is the running time of your algorithm?

14-2 Longest palindrome subsequence
A palindrome is a nonempty string over some alphabet that reads the

same forward and backward. Examples of palindromes are all strings of
length 1, civic, racecar, and aibohphobia (fear of palindromes).

Give an efficient algorithm to find the longest palindrome that is a
subsequence of a given input string. For example, given the input
character, your algorithm should return carac. What is the running
time of your algorithm?

14-3 Bitonic euclidean traveling-salesperson problem
In the euclidean traveling-salesperson problem, you are given a set of n

points in the plane, and your goal is to find the shortest closed tour that

connects all n points.

Figure 14.11 Seven points in the plane, shown on a unit grid. (a) The shortest closed tour, with
length approximately 24.89. This tour is not bitonic. (b) The shortest bitonic tour for the same
set of points. Its length is approximately 25.58.

Figure 14.11(a) shows the solution to a 7-point problem. The general
problem is NP-hard, and its solution is therefore believed to require
more than polynomial time (see Chapter 34).

J. L. Bentley has suggested simplifying the problem by considering

only bitonic tours, that is, tours that start at the leftmost point, go

strictly rightward to the rightmost point, and then go strictly leftward
back to the starting point. Figure 14.11(b) shows the shortest bitonic

tour of the same 7 points. In this case, a polynomial-time algorithm is

possible.

Describe an O(n2)-time algorithm for determining an optimal bitonic
tour. You may assume that no two points have the same x-coordinate
and that all operations on real numbers take unit time. (Hint: Scan left

to right, maintaining optimal possibilities for the two parts of the tour.)

14-4 Printing neatly

Consider the problem of neatly printing a paragraph with a

monospaced font (all characters having the same width). The input text

is a sequence of n words of lengths l1, l2, ..., ln, measured in characters,

which are to be printed neatly on a number of lines that hold a

maximum of M characters each. No word exceeds the line length, so
that li M for i = 1, 2, ..., n. The criterion of "neatness" is as follows. If
a given line contains words i through j, where i j, and exactly one

space appears between words, then the number of extra space

characters at the end of the line is , which must be

nonnegative so that the words fit on the line. The goal is to minimize the

sum, over all lines except the last, of the cubes of the numbers of extra

space characters at the ends of lines. Give a dynamic-programming

algorithm to print a paragraph of n words neatly. Analyze the running

time and space requirements of your algorithm.

14-5 Edit distance

In order to transform a source string of text x[1 : m] to a target string
y[1 : n], you can perform various transformation operations. The goal is,
given x and y, to produce a series of transformations that changes x to
y. An array z--assumed to be large enough to hold all the characters it
needs--holds the intermediate results. Initially, z is empty, and at
termination, you should have z[j] = y[j] for j = 1, 2, ..., n. The procedure
for solving this problem maintains current indices i into x and j into z,
and the operations are allowed to alter z and these indices. Initially, i = j
= 1. Every character in x must be examined during the transformation,

which means that at the end of the sequence of transformation

operations, i = m + 1.

You may choose from among six transformation operations, each of
which has a constant cost that depends on the operation:

Copy a character from x to z by setting z[j] = x[i] and then incrementing
both i and j. This operation examines x[i] and has cost QC.

Replace a character from x by another character c, by setting z[j] = c,
and then incrementing both i and j. This operation examines x[i] and
has cost QR.

Delete a character from x by incrementing i but leaving j alone. This
operation examines x[i] and has cost QD.

Insert the character c into z by setting z[j] = c and then incrementing j,
but leaving i alone. This operation examines no characters of x and
has cost QI.

Twiddle (i.e., exchange) the next two characters by copying them from x
to z but in the opposite order: setting z[j] = x[i + 1] and z[j + 1] = x[i],
and then setting i = i + 2 and j = j + 2. This operation examines x[i]
and x[i + 1] and has cost QT.

Kill the remainder of x by setting i = m + 1. This operation examines all
characters in x that have not yet been examined. This operation, if
performed, must be the final operation. It has cost QK.

Figure 14.12 gives one way to transform the source string
algorithm to the target string altruistic. Several other sequences
of transformation operations can transform algorithm to
altruistic.

Assume that QC < QD + QI and QR < QD + QI, since otherwise, the

copy and replace operations would not be used. The cost of a given
sequence of transformation operations is the sum of the costs of the
individual operations in the sequence. For the sequence above, the cost

of transforming algorithm to altruistic is 3QC + QR + QD +
4QI + QT + QK.

a. Given two sequences x[1 : m] and y[1 : n] and the costs of the
transformation operations, the edit distance from x to y is the cost of
the least expensive operation sequence that transforms x to y.

Describe a dynamic-programming algorithm that finds the edit

distance from x[1 : m] to y[1 : n] and prints an optimal operation

sequence. Analyze the running time and space requirements of your
algorithm.

Figure 14.12 A sequence of operations that transforms the source algorithm to the target

string altruistic. The underlined characters are x[i] and z[j] after the operation.

The edit-distance problem generalizes the problem of aligning two DNA
sequences (see, for example, Setubal and Meidanis [405, Section 3.2]).
There are several methods for measuring the similarity of two DNA

sequences by aligning them. One such method to align two sequences x
and y consists of inserting spaces at arbitrary locations in the two
sequences (including at either end) so that the resulting sequences x
and y have the same length but do not have a space in the same
position (i.e., for no position j are both x[j] and y[j] a space). Then we
assign a "score" to each position. Position j receives a score as follows:

+1 if x[j] = y[j] and neither is a space,
-1 if x[j] y[j] and neither is a space,
-2 if either x[j] or y[j] is a space.

The score for the alignment is the sum of the scores of the individual

positions. For example, given the sequences x = GATCGGCAT and y =

CAATGTGAATC, one alignment is
G ATCG GCAT
CAAT GTGAATC
-*++*+*+-++*
A + under a position indicates a score of +1 for that position, a -
indicates a score of -1, and a * indicates a score of -2, so that this
alignment has a total score of 6 · 1 - 2 · 1 - 4 · 2 = -4.

b. Explain how to cast the problem of finding an optimal alignment as

an edit-distance problem using a subset of the transformation
operations copy, replace, delete, insert, twiddle, and kill.

14-6 Planning a company party

Professor Blutarsky is consulting for the president of a corporation that
is planning a company party. The company has a hierarchical structure,
that is, the supervisor relation forms a tree rooted at the president. The
human resources department has ranked each employee with a
conviviality rating, which is a real number. In order to make the party
fun for all attendees, the president does not want both an employee and
his or her immediate supervisor to attend.

Professor Blutarsky is given the tree that describes the structure of
the corporation, using the left-child, right-sibling representation
described in Section 10.3. Each node of the tree holds, in addition to the
pointers, the name of an employee and that employee's conviviality
ranking. Describe an algorithm to make up a guest list that maximizes
the sum of the conviviality ratings of the guests. Analyze the running
time of your algorithm.

14-7 Viterbi algorithm

Dynamic programming on a directed graph can play a part in speech

recognition. A directed graph G = (V, E) with labeled edges forms a
formal model of a person speaking a restricted language. Each edge (u,
v) E is labeled with a sound (u, v) from a finite set of sounds. Each
directed path in the graph starting from a distinguished vertex v0 V

corresponds to a possible sequence of sounds produced by the model,
with the label of a path being the concatenation of the labels of the
edges on that path.

a. Describe an efficient algorithm that, given an edge-labeled directed
graph G with distinguished vertex v0 and a sequence s = 1, 2, ...,
k of sounds from , returns a path in G that begins at v0 and has s

as its label, if any such path exists. Otherwise, the algorithm should
return NO-SUCH-PATH. Analyze the running time of your

algorithm. (Hint: You may find concepts from Chapter 20 useful.)

Now suppose that every edge (u, v) E has an associated nonnegative
probability p(u, v) of being traversed, so that the corresponding sound

is produced. The sum of the probabilities of the edges leaving any vertex
equals 1. The probability of a path is defined to be the product of the
probabilities of its edges. Think of the probability of a path beginning at

vertex v0 as the probability that a "random walk" beginning at v0
follows the specified path, where the edge leaving a vertex u is taken
randomly, according to the probabilities of the available edges leaving u.

b. Extend your answer to part (a) so that if a path is returned, it is a
most probable path starting at vertex v0 and having label s. Analyze

the running time of your algorithm.

14-8 Image compression by seam carving
Suppose that you are given a color picture consisting of an m×n array
A[1 : m, 1 : n] of pixels, where each pixel specifies a triple of red, green,

and blue (RGB) intensities. You want to compress this picture slightly,

by removing one pixel from each of the m rows, so that the whole

picture becomes one pixel narrower. To avoid incongruous visual
effects, however, the pixels removed in two adjacent rows must lie in
either the same column or adjacent columns. In this way, the pixels
removed form a "seam" from the top row to the bottom row, where
successive pixels in the seam are adjacent vertically or diagonally.

a. Show that the number of such possible seams grows at least
exponentially in m, assuming that n > 1.

b. Suppose now that along with each pixel A[i, j], you are given a real-
valued disruption measure d[i, j], indicating how disruptive it would be
to remove pixel A[i, j]. Intuitively, the lower a pixel's disruption

measure, the more similar the pixel is to its neighbors. Define the
disruption measure of a seam as the sum of the disruption measures
of its pixels.

Give an algorithm to find a seam with the lowest disruption measure.
How efficient is your algorithm?

14-9 Breaking a string

A certain string-processing programming language allows you to break
a string into two pieces. Because this operation copies the string, it costs

n time units to break a string of n characters into two pieces. Suppose

that you want to break a string into many pieces. The order in which
the breaks occur can affect the total amount of time used. For example,
suppose that you want to break a 20-character string after characters 2,
8, and 10 (numbering the characters in ascending order from the lefthand end, starting from 1). If you program the breaks to occur in leftto-right order, then the first break costs 20 time units, the second break
costs 18 time units (breaking the string from characters 3 to 20 at
character 8), and the third break costs 12 time units, totaling 50 time
units. If you program the breaks to occur in right-to-left order,
however, then the first break costs 20 time units, the second break costs
10 time units, and the third break costs 8 time units, totaling 38 time
units. In yet another order, you could break first at 8 (costing 20), then
break the left piece at 2 (costing another 8), and finally the right piece
at 10 (costing 12), for a total cost of 40.

Design an algorithm that, given the numbers of characters after
which to break, determines a least-cost way to sequence those breaks.

More formally, given an array L[1 : m] containing the break points for a
string of n characters, compute the lowest cost for a sequence of breaks,

along with a sequence of breaks that achieves this cost.

14-10 Planning an investment strategy

Your knowledge of algorithms helps you obtain an exciting job with a
hot startup, along with a $10,000 signing bonus. You decide to invest
this money with the goal of maximizing your return at the end of 10
years. You decide to use your investment manager, G. I. Luvcache, to
manage your signing bonus. The company that Luvcache works with

requires you to observe the following rules. It offers n different
investments, numbered 1 through n. In each year j, investment i provides
a return rate of rij. In other words, if you invest d dollars in investment i
in year j, then at the end of year j, you have drij dollars. The return rates

are guaranteed, that is, you are given all the return rates for the next 10
years for each investment. You make investment decisions only once per
year. At the end of each year, you can leave the money made in the
previous year in the same investments, or you can shift money to other
investments, by either shifting money between existing investments or
moving money to a new investment. If you do not move your money

between two consecutive years, you pay a fee of f1 dollars, whereas if
you switch your money, you pay a fee of f2 dollars, where f2 > f1. You

pay the fee once per year at the end of the year, and it is the same

amount, f2, whether you move money in and out of only one

investment, or in and out of many investments.

a. The problem, as stated, allows you to invest your money in multiple

investments in each year. Prove that there exists an optimal
investment strategy that, in each year, puts all the money into a single
investment. (Recall that an optimal investment strategy maximizes the
amount of money after 10 years and is not concerned with any other
objectives, such as minimizing risk.)

b. Prove that the problem of planning your optimal investment strategy

exhibits optimal substructure.

c. Design an algorithm that plans your optimal investment strategy.

What is the running time of your algorithm?

d. Suppose that Luvcache's company imposes the additional restriction

that, at any point, you can have no more than $15,000 in any one
investment. Show that the problem of maximizing your income at the
end of 10 years no longer exhibits optimal substructure.

14-11 Inventory planning

The Rinky Dink Company makes machines that resurface ice rinks. The
demand for such products varies from month to month, and so the
company needs to develop a strategy to plan its manufacturing given
the fluctuating, but predictable, demand. The company wishes to design

a plan for the next n months. For each month i, the company knows the
demand di, that is, the number of machines that it will sell. Let
be the total demand over the next n months. The company keeps a fulltime staff who provide labor to manufacture up to m machines per
month. If the company needs to make more than m machines in a given

month, it can hire additional, part-time labor, at a cost that works out

to c dollars per machine. Furthermore, if the company is holding any

unsold machines at the end of a month, it must pay inventory costs. The

company can hold up to D machines, with the cost for holding j
machines given as a function h(j) for j = 1, 2, ..., D that monotonically
increases with j.

Give an algorithm that calculates a plan for the company that
minimizes its costs while fulfilling all the demand. The running time

should be polynomial in n and D.

14-12 Signing free-agent baseball players

Suppose that you are the general manager for a major-league baseball
team. During the off-season, you need to sign some free-agent players

for your team. The team owner has given you a budget of $X to spend
on free agents. You are allowed to spend less than $X, but the owner
will fire you if you spend any more than $X.

You are considering N different positions, and for each position, P

free-agent players who play that position are available.10 Because you
do not want to overload your roster with too many players at any
position, for each position you may sign at most one free agent who

plays that position. (If you do not sign any players at a particular
position, then you plan to stick with the players you already have at that
position.)

To determine how valuable a player is going to be, you decide to use
a sabermetric statistic11 known as "WAR," or "wins above
replacement." A player with a higher WAR is more valuable than a
player with a lower WAR. It is not necessarily more expensive to sign a
player with a higher WAR than a player with a lower WAR, because
factors other than a player's value determine how much it costs to sign
them.

For each available free-agent player p, you have three pieces of

information:

the player's position,

p.cost, the amount of money it costs to sign the player, and
p.war, the player's WAR.

Devise an algorithm that maximizes the total WAR of the players

you sign while spending no more than $X. You may assume that each

player signs for a multiple of $100,000. Your algorithm should output
the total WAR of the players you sign, the total amount of money you
spend, and a list of which players you sign. Analyze the running time
and space requirement of your algorithm.

Chapter notes

Bellman [44] began the systematic study of dynamic programming in
1955, publishing a book about it in 1957. The word "programming,"
both here and in linear programming, refers to using a tabular solution
method. Although optimization techniques incorporating elements of
dynamic programming were known earlier, Bellman provided the area
with a solid mathematical basis.

Galil and Park [172] classify dynamic-programming algorithms
according to the size of the table and the number of other table entries
each entry depends on. They call a dynamic-programming algorithm

tD/eD if its table size is O(nt) and each entry depends on O(ne) other

entries. For example, the matrix-chain multiplication algorithm in

Section 14.2 is 2D/1D, and the longest-common-subsequence algorithm
in Section 14.4 is 2D/0D.

The MATRIX-CHAIN-ORDER algorithm on page 378 is by

Muraoka and Kuck [339]. Hu and Shing [230, 231] give an O(n lg n)-

time algorithm for the matrix-chain multiplication problem.

The O(mn)-time algorithm for the longest-common-subsequence

problem appears to be a folk algorithm. Knuth [95] posed the question
of whether subquadratic algorithms for the LCS problem exist. Masek
and Paterson [316] answered this question in the affirmative by giving

an algorithm that runs in O(mn/lg n) time, where n m and the

sequences are drawn from a set of bounded size. For the special case in
which no element appears more than once in an input sequence,

Szymanski [425] shows how to solve the problem in O((n + m) lg(n + m))

time. Many of these results extend to the problem of computing string
edit distances (Problem 14-5).

An early paper on variable-length binary encodings by Gilbert and
Moore [181], which had applications to constructing optimal binary

search trees for the case in which all probabilities pi are 0, contains an
O(n3)-time algorithm. Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5] present the

algorithm from Section 14.5. Splay trees [418], which modify the tree in
response to the search queries, come within a constant factor of the
optimal bounds without being initialized with the frequencies. Exercise
14.5-4 is due to Knuth [264]. Hu and Tucker [232] devised an algorithm

for the case in which all probabilities pi are 0 that uses O(n2) time and
O(n) space. Subsequently, Knuth [261] reduced the time to O(n lg n).

Problem 14-8 is due to Avidan and Shamir [30], who have posted on
the web a wonderful video illustrating this image-compression
technique.

1 If pieces are required to be cut in order of monotonically increasing size, there are fewer

ways to consider. For n = 4, only 5 such ways are possible: parts (a), (b), (c), (e), and (h) in

Figure 14.2. The number of ways is called the partition function, which is approximately equal

to . This quantity is less than 2n-1, but still much greater than any polynomial

in n. We won't pursue this line of inquiry further, however.

2 The technical term "memoization" is not a misspelling of "memorization." The word
"memoization" comes from "memo," since the technique consists of recording a value to be
looked up later.

3 None of the three methods from Sections 4.1 and Section 4.2 can be used directly, because
they apply only to square matrices.

4 The term counts all pairs in which i < j. Because i and j may be equal, we need to add in
the n term.

5 We use the term "unweighted" to distinguish this problem from that of finding shortest paths
with weighted edges, which we shall see in Chapters 22 and 23. You can use the breadth-first
search technique of Chapter 20 to solve the unweighted problem.

6 It may seem strange that dynamic programming relies on subproblems being both
independent and overlapping. Although these requirements may sound contradictory, they
describe two different notions, rather than two points on the same axis. Two subproblems of
the same problem are independent if they do not share resources. Two subproblems are
overlapping if they are really the same subproblem that occurs as a subproblem of different
problems.

7 This approach presupposes that you know the set of all possible subproblem parameters and
that you have established the relationship between table positions and subproblems. Another,
more general, approach is to memoize by using hashing with the subproblem parameters as
keys.

8 If the subject of the text is ancient Rome, you might want naumachia to appear near the

root.

9 Yes, naumachia has a Latvian counterpart: nomacija.

10 Although there are nine positions on a baseball team, N is not necessarily equal to 9

because some general managers have particular ways of thinking about positions. For
example, a general manager might consider right-handed pitchers and left-handed pitchers to
be separate "positions," as well as starting pitchers, long relief pitchers (relief pitchers who can
pitch several innings), and short relief pitchers (relief pitchers who normally pitch at most only
one inning).

11 Sabermetrics is the application of statistical analysis to baseball records. It provides several

ways to compare the relative values of individual players.

15 Greedy Algorithms

Algorithms for optimization problems typically go through a sequence
of steps, with a set of choices at each step. For many optimization
problems, using dynamic programming to determine the best choices is

overkill, and simpler, more efficient algorithms will do. A greedy
algorithm always makes the choice that looks best at the moment. That

is, it makes a locally optimal choice in the hope that this choice leads to
a globally optimal solution. This chapter explores optimization
problems for which greedy algorithms provide optimal solutions. Before
reading this chapter, you should read about dynamic programming in
Chapter 14, particularly Section 14.3.

Greedy algorithms do not always yield optimal solutions, but for
many problems they do. We first examine, in Section 15.1, a simple but
nontrivial problem, the activity-selection problem, for which a greedy
algorithm efficiently computes an optimal solution. We'll arrive at the
greedy algorithm by first considering a dynamic-programming approach
and then showing that an optimal solution can result from always
making greedy choices. Section 15.2 reviews the basic elements of the
greedy approach, giving a direct approach for proving greedy
algorithms correct. Section 15.3 presents an important application of
greedy techniques: designing data-compression (Huffman) codes.
Finally, Section 15.4 shows that in order to decide which blocks to
replace when a miss occurs in a cache, the "furthest-in-future" strategy
is optimal if the sequence of block accesses is known in advance.

The greedy method is quite powerful and works well for a wide range
of problems. Later chapters will present many algorithms that you can
view as applications of the greedy method, including minimumspanning-tree algorithms (Chapter 21), Dijkstra's algorithm for shortest
paths from a single source (Section 22.3), and a greedy set-covering
heuristic (Section 35.3). Minimum-spanning-tree algorithms furnish a
classic example of the greedy method. Although you can read this
chapter and Chapter 21 independently of each other, you might find it
useful to read them together.