15.1 An activity-selection problem

Our first example is the problem of scheduling several competing
activities that require exclusive use of a common resource, with a goal
of selecting a maximum-size set of mutually compatible activities.
Imagine that you are in charge of scheduling a conference room. You

are presented with a set S = {a1, a2, ... , an} of n proposed activities

that wish to reserve the conference room, and the room can serve only

one activity at a time. Each activity ai has a start time si and a finish
time fi, where 0 si < fi < . If selected, activity ai takes place during
the half-open time interval [si, fi). Activities ai and aj are compatible if
the intervals [si, fi) and [sj, fj) do not overlap. That is, ai and aj are
compatible if si fj or sj fi. (Assume that if your staff needs time to

change over the room from one activity to the next, the changeover

time is built into the intervals.) In the activity-selection problem, your

goal is to select a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible
activities. Assume that the activities are sorted in monotonically
increasing order of finish time:

(We'll see later the advantage that this assumption provides.) For

example, consider the set of activities in Figure 15.1. The subset {a3, a9,
a11} consists of mutually compatible activities. It is not a maximum

subset, however, since the subset {a1, a4, a8, a11} is larger. In fact, {a1,
a4, a8, a11} is a largest subset of mutually compatible activities, and
another largest subset is {a2, a4, a9, a11}.

We'll see how to solve this problem, proceeding in several steps. First
we'll explore a dynamic-programming solution, in which you consider
several choices when determining which subproblems to use in an
optimal solution. We'll then observe that you need to consider only one
choice--the greedy choice--and that when you make the greedy choice,
only one subproblem remains. Based on these observations, we'll
develop a recursive greedy algorithm to solve the activity-selection
problem. Finally, we'll complete the process of developing a greedy
solution by converting the recursive algorithm to an iterative one.
Although the steps we go through in this section are slightly more
involved than is typical when developing a greedy algorithm, they
illustrate the relationship between greedy algorithms and dynamic
programming.

Figure 15.1 A set {a1, a2, ... , a11} of activities. Activity ai has start time si and finish time fi.

The optimal substructure of the activity-selection problem

Let's verify that the activity-selection problem exhibits optimal

substructure. Denote by Sij the set of activities that start after activity
ai finishes and that finish before activity aj starts. Suppose that you
want to find a maximum set of mutually compatible activities in Sij, and
suppose further that such a maximum set is Aij, which includes some
activity ak. By including ak in an optimal solution, you are left with two
subproblems: finding mutually compatible activities in the set Sik
(activities that start after activity ai finishes and that finish before
activity ak starts) and finding mutually compatible activities in the set

Skj (activities that start after activity ak finishes and that finish before

activity aj starts). Let Aik = Aij Sik and Akj = Aij Skj, so that Aik

contains the activities in Aij that finish before ak starts and Akj

contains the activities in Aij that start after ak finishes. Thus, we have

Aij = Aik {ak} Akj, and so the maximum-size set Aij of mutually

compatible activities in Sij consists of |Aij | = |Aik| + |Akj | + 1 activities.

The usual cut-and-paste argument shows that an optimal solution

Aij must also include optimal solutions to the two subproblems for Sik

and Skj. If you could find a set of mutually compatible activities in

Skj where , then you could use , rather than Akj, in a

solution to the subproblem for Sij. You would have constructed a set of

mutually compatible activities,

which contradicts the assumption that Aij is an optimal solution. A

symmetric argument applies to the activities in Sik.

This way of characterizing optimal substructure suggests that you

can solve the activity-selection problem by dynamic programming. Let's

denote the size of an optimal solution for the set Sij by c[i, j]. Then, the

dynamic-programming approach gives the recurrence

c[i, j] = c[i, k] + c[k, j] + 1.

Of course, if you do not know that an optimal solution for the set Sij
includes activity ak, you must examine all activities in Sij to find which

one to choose, so that

You can then develop a recursive algorithm and memoize it, or you can
work bottom-up and fill in table entries as you go along. But you would
be overlooking another important characteristic of the activityselection problem that you can use to great advantage.

Making the greedy choice

What if you could choose an activity to add to an optimal solution

without having to first solve all the subproblems? That could save you

from having to consider all the choices inherent in recurrence (15.2). In

fact, for the activity-selection problem, you need to consider only one

choice: the greedy choice.

What is the greedy choice for the activity-selection problem?

Intuition suggests that you should choose an activity that leaves the

resource available for as many other activities as possible. Of the

activities you end up choosing, one of them must be the first one to

finish. Intuition says, therefore, choose the activity in S with the earliest

finish time, since that leaves the resource available for as many of the

activities that follow it as possible. (If more than one activity in S has

the earliest finish time, then choose any such activity.) In other words,

since the activities are sorted in monotonically increasing order by

finish time, the greedy choice is activity a1. Choosing the first activity to

finish is not the only way to think of making a greedy choice for this

problem. Exercise 15.1-3 asks you to explore other possibilities.

Once you make the greedy choice, you have only one remaining

subproblem to solve: finding activities that start after a1 finishes. Why
don't you have to consider activities that finish before a1 starts?
Because s1 < f1, and because f1 is the earliest finish time of any activity,
no activity can have a finish time less than or equal to s1. Thus, all
activities that are compatible with activity a1 must start after a1

finishes.

Furthermore, we have already established that the activity-selection

problem exhibits optimal substructure. Let Sk = {ai S : si fk} be the
set of activities that start after activity ak finishes. If you make the
greedy choice of activity a1, then S1 remains as the only subproblem to

solve.1 Optimal substructure says that if a1 belongs to an optimal

solution, then an optimal solution to the original problem consists of

activity a1 and all the activities in an optimal solution to the
subproblem S1.

One big question remains: Is this intuition correct? Is the greedy
choice--in which you choose the first activity to finish--always part of
some optimal solution? The following theorem shows that it is.

Theorem 15.1
Consider any nonempty subproblem Sk, and let am be an activity in Sk
with the earliest finish time. Then am is included in some maximum-size
subset of mutually compatible activities of Sk.

Proof Let Ak be a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible

activities in Sk, and let aj be the activity in Ak with the earliest finish

time. If aj = am, we are done, since we have shown that am belongs to

some maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities of Sk. If aj

am, let the set be Ak but substituting am for aj.

The activities in are compatible, which follows because the activities

in Ak are compatible, aj is the first activity in Ak to finish, and fm fj.

Since , we conclude that is a maximum-size subset of

mutually compatible activities of Sk, and it includes am.

Although you might be able to solve the activity-selection problem
with dynamic programming, Theorem 15.1 says that you don't need to.
Instead, you can repeatedly choose the activity that finishes first, keep
only the activities compatible with this activity, and repeat until no
activities remain. Moreover, because you always choose the activity
with the earliest finish time, the finish times of the activities that you
choose must strictly increase. You can consider each activity just once
overall, in monotonically increasing order of finish times.

An algorithm to solve the activity-selection problem does not need
to work bottom-up, like a table-based dynamic-programming algorithm.
Instead, it can work top-down, choosing an activity to put into the
optimal solution that it constructs and then solving the subproblem of
choosing activities from those that are compatible with those already
chosen. Greedy algorithms typically have this top-down design: make a

choice and then solve a subproblem, rather than the bottom-up
technique of solving subproblems before making a choice.

A recursive greedy algorithm

Now that you know you can bypass the dynamic-programming
approach and instead use a top-down, greedy algorithm, let's see a
straightforward, recursive procedure to solve the activity-selection
problem. The procedure RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR on the
following page takes the start and finish times of the activities,

represented as arrays s and f,2 the index k that defines the subproblem
Sk it is to solve, and the size n of the original problem. It returns a
maximum-size set of mutually compatible activities in Sk. The
procedure assumes that the n input activities are already ordered by

monotonically increasing finish time, according to equation (15.1). If

not, you can first sort them into this order in O(n lg n) time, breaking
ties arbitrarily. In order to start, add the fictitious activity a0 with f0 =
0, so that subproblem S0 is the entire set of activities S. The initial call,

which solves the entire problem, is RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-

SELECTOR (s, f, 0, n).

RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, k, n)
1 m=k+1
2 while m n and s[m] < f [k] // find the first activity in Sk to finish
3 m=m+1
4 if m n
5 return {am} RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, m,

n)

6 else return

Figure 15.2 shows how the algorithm operates on the activities in
Figure 15.1. In a given recursive call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-

SELECTOR (s, f, k, n), the while loop of lines 23 looks for the first
activity in Sk to finish. The loop examines ak+1, ak+2, ... , an, until it

finds the first activity am that is compatible with ak, which means that
sm fk. If the loop terminates because it finds such an activity, line 5
returns the union of {am} and the maximum-size subset of Sm returned
by the recursive call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, m, n).
Alternatively, the loop may terminate because m > n, in which case the
procedure has examined all activities in Sk without finding one that is
compatible with ak. In this case, Sk = , and so line 6 returns .

Assuming that the activities have already been sorted by finish times,

the running time of the call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s,
f, 0, n) is (n). To see why, observe that over all recursive calls, each

activity is examined exactly once in the while loop test of line 2. In

particular, activity ai is examined in the last call made in which k < i.

An iterative greedy algorithm

The recursive procedure can be converted to an iterative one because
the procedure RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR is almost "tail
recursive" (see Problem 7-5): it ends with a recursive call to itself
followed by a union operation. It is usually a straightforward task to
transform a tail-recursive procedure to an iterative form. In fact, some
compilers for certain programming languages perform this task
automatically.

Figure 15.2 The operation of RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR on the 11 activities

from Figure 15.1. Activities considered in each recursive call appear between horizontal lines.

The fictitious activity a0 finishes at time 0, and the initial call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITYSELECTOR (s, f, 0, 11), selects activity a1. In each recursive call, the activities that have

already been selected are blue, and the activity shown in tan is being considered. If the

starting time of an activity occurs before the finish time of the most recently added activity

(the arrow between them points left), it is rejected. Otherwise (the arrow points directly up or

to the right), it is selected. The last recursive call, RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s,
f, 11, 11), returns . The resulting set of selected activities is {a1, a4, a8, a11}.

The procedure GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR is an iterative
version of the procedure RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR. It,
too, assumes that the input activities are ordered by monotonically

increasing finish time. It collects selected activities into a set A and

returns this set when it is done.

GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, n)

1 A = {a1} // is am in Sk?
2 k=1
3 for m = 2 to n // yes, so choose it
4 if s[m] f [k]
// and continue from there
5 A = A {am}

6 k=m

7 return A

The procedure works as follows. The variable k indexes the most
recent addition to A, corresponding to the activity ak in the recursive

version. Since the procedure considers the activities in order of

monotonically increasing finish time, fk is always the maximum finish
time of any activity in A. That is,

Lines 12 select activity a1, initialize A to contain just this activity, and

initialize k to index this activity. The for loop of lines 36 finds the
earliest activity in Sk to finish. The loop considers each activity am in
turn and adds am to A if it is compatible with all previously selected
activities. Such an activity is the earliest in Sk to finish. To see whether
activity am is compatible with every activity currently in A, it suffices by
equation (15.3) to check (in line 4) that its start time sm is not earlier
than the finish time fk of the activity most recently added to A. If
activity am is compatible, then lines 56 add activity am to A and set k
to m. The set A returned by the call GREEDY-ACTIVITY-

SELECTOR (s, f) is precisely the set returned by the initial call
RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR (s, f, 0, n).

Like the recursive version, GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR

schedules a set of n activities in (n) time, assuming that the activities

were already sorted initially by their finish times.

Exercises

15.1-1

Give a dynamic-programming algorithm for the activity-selection
problem, based on recurrence (15.2). Have your algorithm compute the

sizes c[i, j] as defined above and also produce the maximum-size subset

of mutually compatible activities. Assume that the inputs have been
sorted as in equation (15.1). Compare the running time of your solution
to the running time of GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.

15.1-2

Suppose that instead of always selecting the first activity to finish, you
instead select the last activity to start that is compatible with all
previously selected activities. Describe how this approach is a greedy
algorithm, and prove that it yields an optimal solution.

15.1-3

Not just any greedy approach to the activity-selection problem
produces a maximum-size set of mutually compatible activities. Give an
example to show that the approach of selecting the activity of least
duration from among those that are compatible with previously selected
activities does not work. Do the same for the approaches of always
selecting the compatible activity that overlaps the fewest other
remaining activities and always selecting the compatible remaining
activity with the earliest start time.

15.1-4

You are given a set of activities to schedule among a large number of
lecture halls, where any activity can take place in any lecture hall. You
wish to schedule all the activities using as few lecture halls as possible.

Give an efficient greedy algorithm to determine which activity should
use which lecture hall.

(This problem is also known as the interval-graph coloring problem. It

is modeled by an interval graph whose vertices are the given activities
and whose edges connect incompatible activities. The smallest number
of colors required to color every vertex so that no two adjacent vertices
have the same color corresponds to finding the fewest lecture halls
needed to schedule all of the given activities.)

15.1-5

Consider a modification to the activity-selection problem in which each

activity ai has, in addition to a start and finish time, a value vi. The

objective is no longer to maximize the number of activities scheduled,
but instead to maximize the total value of the activities scheduled. That

is, the goal is to choose a set A of compatible activities such that

is maximized. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for this
problem.