15.3 Huffman codes

Huffman codes compress data well: savings of 20% to 90% are typical,
depending on the characteristics of the data being compressed. The

data arrive as a sequence of characters. Huffman's greedy algorithm
uses a table giving how often each character occurs (its frequency) to
build up an optimal way of representing each character as a binary
string.

Suppose that you have a 100,000-character data file that you wish to
store compactly and you know that the 6 distinct characters in the file
occur with the frequencies given by Figure 15.4. The character a occurs
45,000 times, the character b occurs 13,000 times, and so on.

You have many options for how to represent such a file of

information. Here, we consider the problem of designing a binary
character code (or code for short) in which each character is
represented by a unique binary string, which we call a codeword. If you
use a fixed-length code, you need lg n bits to represent n 2

characters. For 6 characters, therefore, you need 3 bits: a = 000, b =
001, c = 010, d = 011, e = 100, and f = 101. This method requires
300,000 bits to encode the entire file. Can you do better?

Figure 15.4 A character-coding problem. A data file of 100,000 characters contains only the
characters af, with the frequencies indicated. With each character represented by a 3-bit
codeword, encoding the file requires 300,000 bits. With the variable-length code shown, the
encoding requires only 224,000 bits.

A variable-length code can do considerably better than a fixed-length

code. The idea is simple: give frequent characters short codewords and
infrequent characters long codewords. Figure 15.4 shows such a code.
Here, the 1-bit string 0 represents a, and the 4-bit string 1100
represents f. This code requires

(45 · 1 + 13 · 3 + 12 · 3 + 16 · 3 + 9 · 4 + 5 · 4) · 1,000 = 224,000 bits

to represent the file, a savings of approximately 25%. In fact, this is an
optimal character code for this file, as we shall see.

Prefix-free codes

We consider here only codes in which no codeword is also a prefix of

some other codeword. Such codes are called prefix-free codes. Although

we won't prove it here, a prefix-free code can always achieve the optimal
data compression among any character code, and so we suffer no loss
of generality by restricting our attention to prefix-free codes.

Encoding is always simple for any binary character code: just
concatenate the codewords representing each character of the file. For
example, with the variable-length prefix-free code of Figure 15.4, the 4character file face has the encoding 1100 · 0 · 100 · 1101 =
110001001101, where "·" denotes concatenation.

Prefix-free codes are desirable because they simplify decoding. Since
no codeword is a prefix of any other, the codeword that begins an
encoded file is unambiguous. You can simply identify the initial
codeword, translate it back to the original character, and repeat the
decoding process on the remainder of the encoded file. In our example,
the string 100011001101 parses uniquely as 100 · 0 · 1100 · 1101, which
decodes to cafe.

Figure 15.5 Trees corresponding to the coding schemes in Figure 15.4. Each leaf is labeled
with a character and its frequency of occurrence. Each internal node is labeled with the sum of
the frequencies of the leaves in its subtree. All frequencies are in thousands. (a) The tree
corresponding to the fixed-length code a = 000, b = 001, c = 010, d = 011, e = 100, f = 101.
(b) The tree corresponding to the optimal prefix-free code a = 0, b = 101, c = 100, d = 111, e
= 1101, f = 1100.

The decoding process needs a convenient representation for the
prefix-free code so that you can easily pick off the initial codeword. A

binary tree whose leaves are the given characters provides one such
representation. Interpret the binary codeword for a character as the
simple path from the root to that character, where 0 means "go to the
left child" and 1 means "go to the right child." Figure 15.5 shows the
trees for the two codes of our example. Note that these are not binary
search trees, since the leaves need not appear in sorted order and
internal nodes do not contain character keys.

An optimal code for a file is always represented by a full binary tree,

in which every nonleaf node has two children (see Exercise 15.3-2). The
fixed-length code in our example is not optimal since its tree, shown in
Figure 15.5(a), is not a full binary tree: it contains codewords beginning
with 10, but none beginning with 11. Since we can now restrict our

attention to full binary trees, we can say that if C is the alphabet from

which the characters are drawn and all character frequencies are

positive, then the tree for an optimal prefix-free code has exactly |C |
leaves, one for each letter of the alphabet, and exactly |C | - 1 internal

nodes (see Exercise B.5-3 on page 1175).

Given a tree T corresponding to a prefix-free code, we can compute
the number of bits required to encode a file. For each character c in the
alphabet C, let the attribute c.freq denote the frequency of c in the file
and let dT(c) denote the depth of c's leaf in the tree. Note that dT (c) is
also the length of the codeword for character c. The number of bits

required to encode a file is thus

which we define as the cost of the tree T.

Constructing a Huffman code

Huffman invented a greedy algorithm that constructs an optimal prefix-

free code, called a Huffman code in his honor. In line with our

observations in Section 15.2, its proof of correctness relies on the
greedy-choice property and optimal substructure. Rather than
demonstrating that these properties hold and then developing

pseudocode, we present the pseudocode first. Doing so will help clarify
how the algorithm makes greedy choices.

The procedure HUFFMAN assumes that C is a set of n characters
and that each character c C is an object with an attribute c.freq giving
its frequency. The algorithm builds the tree T corresponding to an
optimal code in a bottom-up manner. It begins with a set of |C | leaves
and performs a sequence of |C | - 1 "merging" operations to create the
final tree. The algorithm uses a min-priority queue Q, keyed on the freq

attribute, to identify the two least-frequent objects to merge together.
The result of merging two objects is a new object whose frequency is the
sum of the frequencies of the two objects that were merged.

HUFFMAN(C)

1n = |C |
2Q = C
3for i = 1 to n - 1
4 allocate a new node z
5 x = EXTRACT-MIN(Q)
6 y = EXTRACT-MIN(Q)
7 z.left = x
8 z.right = y
9 z.freq = x.freq + y.freq
10 INSERT(Q, z)
11return EXTRACT-MIN(Q) // the root of the tree is the only node

left

For our example, Huffman's algorithm proceeds as shown in Figure

15.6. Since the alphabet contains 6 letters, the initial queue size is n = 6,

and 5 merge steps build the tree. The final tree represents the optimal
prefix-free code. The codeword for a letter is the sequence of edge labels
on the simple path from the root to the letter.

Figure 15.6 The steps of Huffman's algorithm for the frequencies given in Figure 15.4. Each
part shows the contents of the queue sorted into increasing order by frequency. Each step
merges the two trees with the lowest frequencies. Leaves are shown as rectangles containing a
character and its frequency. Internal nodes are shown as circles containing the sum of the
frequencies of their children. An edge connecting an internal node with its children is labeled 0
if it is an edge to a left child and 1 if it is an edge to a right child. The codeword for a letter is
the sequence of labels on the edges connecting the root to the leaf for that letter. (a) The initial

set of n = 6 nodes, one for each letter. (b)(e) Intermediate stages. (f) The final tree.

The HUFFMAN procedure works as follows. Line 2 initializes the

min-priority queue Q with the characters in C. The for loop in lines 3
10 repeatedly extracts the two nodes x and y of lowest frequency from
the queue and replaces them in the queue with a new node z
representing their merger. The frequency of z is computed as the sum of
the frequencies of x and y in line 9. The node z has x as its left child and
y as its right child. (This order is arbitrary. Switching the left and right
child of any node yields a different code of the same cost.) After n - 1

mergers, line 11 returns the one node left in the queue, which is the root
of the code tree.

The algorithm produces the same result without the variables x and
y, assigning the values returned by the EXTRACT-MIN calls directly
to z.left and z.right in lines 7 and 8, and changing line 9 to z.freq =
z.left.freq+z.right.freq. We'll use the node names x and y in the proof of

correctness, however, so we leave them in.
The running time of Huffman's algorithm depends on how the min-

priority queue Q is implemented. Let's assume that it's implemented as a
binary min-heap (see Chapter 6). For a set C of n characters, the
BUILD-MIN-HEAP procedure discussed in Section 6.3 can initialize Q
in line 2 in O(n) time. The for loop in lines 310 executes exactly n - 1
times, and since each heap operation runs in O(lg n) time, the loop
contributes O(n lg n) to the running time. Thus, the total running time
of HUFFMAN on a set of n characters is O(n lg n).

Correctness of Huffman's algorithm

To prove that the greedy algorithm HUFFMAN is correct, we'll show
that the problem of determining an optimal prefix-free code exhibits the
greedy-choice and optimal-substructure properties. The next lemma
shows that the greedy-choice property holds.

Lemma 15.2 (Optimal prefix-free codes have the greedy-choice property)
Let C be an alphabet in which each character c C has frequency
c.freq. Let x and y be two characters in C having the lowest frequencies.
Then there exists an optimal prefix-free code for C in which the
codewords for x and y have the same length and differ only in the last

bit.

Proof The idea of the proof is to take the tree T representing an

arbitrary optimal prefix-free code and modify it to make a tree
representing another optimal prefix-free code such that the characters

x and y appear as sibling leaves of maximum depth in the new tree. In
such a tree, the codewords for x and y have the same length and differ

only in the last bit.

Let a and b be any two characters that are sibling leaves of maximum
depth in T. Without loss of generality, assume that a.freq b.freq and
x.freq y.freq. Since x.freq and y.freq are the two lowest leaf
frequencies, in order, and a.freq and b.freq are two arbitrary
frequencies, in order, we have x.freq a.freq and y.freq b.freq.

In the remainder of the proof, it is possible that we could have x.freq
= a.freq or y.freq = b.freq, but x.freq = b.freq implies that a.freq = b.freq
= x.freq = y.freq (see Exercise 15.3-1), and the lemma would be trivially
true. Therefore, assume that x.freq b.freq, which means that x b.

Figure 15.7 An illustration of the key step in the proof of Lemma 15.2. In the optimal tree T,
leaves a and b are two siblings of maximum depth. Leaves x and y are the two characters with
the lowest frequencies. They appear in arbitrary positions in T. Assuming that x b, swapping
leaves a and x produces tree T, and then swapping leaves b and y produces tree T . Since
each swap does not increase the cost, the resulting tree T is also an optimal tree.

As Figure 15.7 shows, imagine exchanging the positions in T of a and
x to produce a tree T, and then exchanging the positions in T of b and
y to produce a tree T in which x and y are sibling leaves of maximum
depth. (Note that if x = b but y a, then tree T does not have x and y
as sibling leaves of maximum depth. Because we assume that x b, this

situation cannot occur.) By equation (15.4), the difference in cost

between T and T is

because both a.freq - x.freq and dT (a) - dT (x) are nonnegative. More
specifically, a.freq - x.freq is nonnegative because x is a minimumfrequency leaf, and dT (a) - dT (x) is nonnegative because a is a leaf of
maximum depth in T. Similarly, exchanging y and b does not increase
the cost, and so B(T) - B(T ) is nonnegative. Therefore, B(T ) B(T)
B(T), and since T is optimal, we have B(T) B(T ), which implies B(T
) = B(T). Thus, T is an optimal tree in which x and y appear as

sibling leaves of maximum depth, from which the lemma follows.

Lemma 15.2 implies that the process of building up an optimal tree
by mergers can, without loss of generality, begin with the greedy choice
of merging together those two characters of lowest frequency. Why is
this a greedy choice? We can view the cost of a single merger as being
the sum of the frequencies of the two items being merged. Exercise
15.3-4 shows that the total cost of the tree constructed equals the sum
of the costs of its mergers. Of all possible mergers at each step,
HUFFMAN chooses the one that incurs the least cost.

The next lemma shows that the problem of constructing optimal
prefix-free codes has the optimal-substructure property.

Lemma 15.3 (Optimal prefix-free codes have the optimal-substructure
property)
Let C be a given alphabet with frequency c.freq defined for each
character c C. Let x and y be two characters in C with minimum
frequency. Let C be the alphabet C with the characters x and y
removed and a new character z added, so that C = (C - {x, y}) {z}.
Define freq for all characters in C with the same values as in C, along
with z.freq = x.freq + y.freq. Let T be any tree representing an optimal
prefix-free code for alphabet C. Then the tree T, obtained from T by
replacing the leaf node for z with an internal node having x and y as
children, represents an optimal prefix-free code for the alphabet C.

Proof We first show how to express the cost B(T) of tree T in terms of
the cost B(T) of tree T, by considering the component costs in
equation (15.4). For each character c C - {x, y}, we have that dT (c)

= dT (c), and hence c.freq · dT (c) = c.freq · dT (c). Since dT (x) = dT
(y) = dT (z) + 1, we have

x.freq · dT (x) + y.freq · dT (y) = (x.freq + y.freq)(dT (z) + 1)
= z.freq · dT(z)+ (x.freq + y.freq),

from which we conclude that

B(T) = B(T) + x.freq + y.freq

or, equivalently,

B(T) = B(T) - x.freq - y.freq.
We now prove the lemma by contradiction. Suppose that T does not

represent an optimal prefix-free code for C. Then there exists an
optimal tree T such that B(T) < B(T). Without loss of generality (by
Lemma 15.2), T has x and y as siblings. Let T be the tree T with the
common parent of x and y replaced by a leaf z with frequency z.freq =
x.freq + y.freq. Then

B(T) = B(T) - x.freq - y.freq
< B(T) - x.freq - y.freq
= B(T),

yielding a contradiction to the assumption that T represents an optimal
prefix-free code for C. Thus, T must represent an optimal prefix-free
code for the alphabet C.

Theorem 15.4

Procedure HUFFMAN produces an optimal prefix-free code.

Proof Immediate from Lemmas 15.2 and 15.3.

Exercises

15.3-1

Explain why, in the proof of Lemma 15.2, if x.freq = b.freq, then we
must have a.freq = b.freq = x.freq = y.freq.

15.3-2

Prove that a non-full binary tree cannot correspond to an optimal
prefix-free code.

15.3-3

What is an optimal Huffman code for the following set of frequencies,
based on the first 8 Fibonacci numbers?

a:1 b:1 c:2 d:3 e:5 f:8 g:13 h:21

Can you generalize your answer to find the optimal code when the

frequencies are the first n Fibonacci numbers?

15.3-4
Prove that the total cost B(T) of a full binary tree T for a code equals

the sum, over all internal nodes, of the combined frequencies of the two
children of the node.

15.3-5
Given an optimal prefix-free code on a set C of n characters, you wish

to transmit the code itself using as few bits as possible. Show how to

represent any optimal prefix-free code on C using only 2n - 1 + n lg n
bits. (Hint: Use 2n - 1 bits to specify the structure of the tree, as

discovered by a walk of the tree.)

15.3-6

Generalize Huffman's algorithm to ternary codewords (i.e., codewords
using the symbols 0, 1, and 2), and prove that it yields optimal ternary
codes.

15.3-7

A data file contains a sequence of 8-bit characters such that all 256
characters are about equally common: the maximum character
frequency is less than twice the minimum character frequency. Prove

that Huffman coding in this case is no more efficient than using an
ordinary 8-bit fixed-length code.

15.3-8

Show that no lossless (invertible) compression scheme can guarantee

that for every input file, the corresponding output file is shorter. (Hint:

Compare the number of possible files with the number of possible
encoded files.)