16.2 The accounting method

In the accounting method of amortized analysis, you assign differing

charges to different operations, with some operations charged more or
less than they actually cost. The amount that you charge an operation is

its amortized cost. When an operation's amortized cost exceeds its

actual cost, you assign the difference to specific objects in the data

structure as credit. Credit can help pay for later operations whose

amortized cost is less than their actual cost. Thus, you can view the

amortized cost of an operation as being split between its actual cost
and credit that is either deposited or used up. Different operations may
have different amortized costs. This method differs from aggregate
analysis, in which all operations have the same amortized cost.

You must choose the amortized costs of operations carefully. If you
want to use amortized costs to show that in the worst case the average
cost per operation is small, you must ensure that the total amortized
cost of a sequence of operations provides an upper bound on the total
actual cost of the sequence. Moreover, as in aggregate analysis, the
upper bound must apply to all sequences of operations. Let's denote the

actual cost of the ith operation by ci and the amortized cost of the ith
operation by i. Then you need to have

for all sequences of n operations. The total credit stored in the data

structure is the difference between the total amortized cost and the

total actual cost, or . By inequality (16.1), the total

credit associated with the data structure must be nonnegative at all

times. If you ever allowed the total credit to become negative (the result

of undercharging early operations with the promise of repaying the

account later on), then the total amortized costs incurred at that time

would be below the total actual costs incurred. In that case, for the

sequence of operations up to that time, the total amortized cost would

not be an upper bound on the total actual cost. Thus, you must take

care that the total credit in the data structure never becomes negative.

Stack operations

To illustrate the accounting method of amortized analysis, we return to
the stack example. Recall that the actual costs of the operations were

PUSH 1,

POP 1,

MULTIPOPmin {s,

k},

where k is the argument supplied to MULTIPOP and s is the stack size

when it is called. Let us assign the following amortized costs:

PUSH 2,

POP 0,

MULTIPOP0.

The amortized cost of MULTIPOP is a constant (0), whereas the actual
cost is variable, and thus all three amortized costs are constant. In
general, the amortized costs of the operations under consideration may
differ from each other, and they may even differ asymptotically.

Now let's see how to pay for any sequence of stack operations by
charging the amortized costs. Let $1 represent each unit of cost. At
first, the stack is empty. Recall the analogy of Section 10.1.3 between
the stack data structure and a stack of plates in a cafeteria. Upon
pushing a plate onto the stack, use $1 to pay the actual cost of the
push, leaving a credit of $1 (out of the $2 charged). Place that $1 of
credit on top of the plate. At any point in time, every plate on the stack
has $1 of credit on it.

The $1 stored on the plate serves to prepay the cost of popping the
plate from the stack. A POP operation incurs no charge: pay the actual
cost of popping a plate by taking the $1 of credit off the plate. Thus, by
charging the PUSH operation a little bit more, we can view the POP
operation as free.

Moreover, the MULTIPOP operation also incurs no charge, since it's
just repeated POP operations, each of which is free. If a MULTIPOP

operation pops k plates, then the actual cost is paid by the k dollars
stored on the k plates. Because each plate on the stack has $1 of credit

on it, and the stack always has a nonnegative number of plates, the

amount of credit is always nonnegative. Thus, for any sequence of n

PUSH, POP, and MULTIPOP operations, the total amortized cost is an
upper bound on the total actual cost. Since the total amortized cost is

O(n), so is the total actual cost.

Incrementing a binary counter

As another illustration of the accounting method, let's analyze the
INCREMENT operation on a binary counter that starts at 0. Recall
that the running time of this operation is proportional to the number of
bits flipped, which serves as the cost for this example. Again, we'll use
$1 to represent each unit of cost (the flipping of a bit in this example).

For the amortized analysis, the amortized cost to set a 0-bit to 1 is
$2. When a bit is set to 1, $1 of the $2 pays to actually set the bit. The
second $1 resides on the bit as credit to be used later if and when the bit
is reset to 0. At any point in time, every 1-bit in the counter has $1 of
credit on it, and thus resetting a bit to 0 can be viewed as costing
nothing, and the $1 on the bit prepays for the reset.

Here is how to determine the amortized cost of INCREMENT. The
cost of resetting the bits to 0 within the while loop is paid for by the
dollars on the bits that are reset. The INCREMENT procedure sets at
most one bit to 1, in line 6, and therefore the amortized cost of an
INCREMENT operation is at most $2. The number of 1-bits in the
counter never becomes negative, and thus the amount of credit stays

nonnegative at all times. Thus, for n INCREMENT operations, the total
amortized cost is O(n), which bounds the total actual cost.

Exercises

16.2-1

You perform a sequence of PUSH and POP operations on a stack

whose size never exceeds k. After every k operations, a copy of the

entire stack is made automatically, for backup purposes. Show that the

cost of n stack operations, including copying the stack, is O(n) by

assigning suitable amortized costs to the various stack operations.

16.2-2

Redo Exercise 16.1-3 using an accounting method of analysis.

16.2-3

You wish not only to increment a counter but also to reset it to 0 (i.e.,
make all bits in it 0). Counting the time to examine or modify a bit as
(1), show how to implement a counter as an array of bits so that any

sequence of n INCREMENT and RESET operations takes O(n) time
on an initially zero counter. (Hint: Keep a pointer to the high-order 1.)