16.3 The potential method

Instead of representing prepaid work as credit stored with specific

objects in the data structure, the potential method of amortized analysis

represents the prepaid work as "potential energy," or just "potential,"
which can be released to pay for future operations. The potential
applies to the data structure as a whole rather than to specific objects
within the data structure.

The potential method works as follows. Starting with an initial data

structure D0, a sequence of n operations occurs. For each i = 1, 2, ... , n,
let ci be the actual cost of the ith operation and Di be the data structure
that results after applying the ith operation to data structure Di-1. A
potential function maps each data structure Di to a real number
(Di), which is the potential associated with Di. The amortized cost i of
the ith operation with respect to potential function is defined by

The amortized cost of each operation is therefore its actual cost plus
the change in potential due to the operation. By equation (16.2), the

total amortized cost of the n operations is

The second equation follows from equation (A.12) on page 1143

because the (Di) terms telescope.

If you can define a potential function so that (Dn) (D0), then

the total amortized cost gives an upper bound on the total

actual cost . In practice, you don't always know how many

operations might be performed. Therefore, if you require that (Di)
(D0) for all i, then you guarantee, as in the accounting method, that
you've paid in advance. It's usually simplest to just define (D0) to be 0
and then show that (Di) 0 for all i. (See Exercise 16.3-1 for an easy
way to handle cases in which (D0) 0.)

Intuitively, if the potential difference (Di) - (Di-1) of the ith
operation is positive, then the amortized cost i represents an
overcharge to the ith operation, and the potential of the data structure

increases. If the potential difference is negative, then the amortized cost

represents an undercharge to the ith operation, and the decrease in the

potential pays for the actual cost of the operation.
The amortized costs defined by equations (16.2) and (16.3) depend

on the choice of the potential function . Different potential functions
may yield different amortized costs, yet still be upper bounds on the
actual costs. You will often find trade-offs that you can make in
choosing a potential function. The best potential function to use
depends on the desired time bounds.

Stack operations

To illustrate the potential method, we return once again to the example
of the stack operations PUSH, POP, and MULTIPOP. We define the
potential function on a stack to be the number of objects in the

stack. The potential of the empty initial stack D0 is (D0) = 0. Since
the number of objects in the stack is never negative, the stack Di that
results after the ith operation has nonnegative potential, and thus

(Di) 0
= (D0).

The total amortized cost of n operations with respect to therefore

represents an upper bound on the actual cost.
Now let's compute the amortized costs of the various stack

operations. If the ith operation on a stack containing s objects is a

PUSH operation, then the potential difference is

(Di) - (Di-1) = (s + 1) - s

= 1.

By equation (16.2), the amortized cost of this PUSH operation is

i = ci + (Di) - (Di-1)

=1+1
= 2.

Suppose that the ith operation on the stack of s objects is
MULTIPOP(S, k), which causes k = min {s, k} objects to be popped
off the stack. The actual cost of the operation is k, and the potential

difference is

(Di) - (Di-1) = -k.

Thus, the amortized cost of the MULTIPOP operation is

i = ci + (Di) - (Di-1)
= k - k

= 0.

Similarly, the amortized cost of an ordinary POP operation is 0.

The amortized cost of each of the three operations is O(1), and thus
the total amortized cost of a sequence of n operations is O(n). Since
(Di) (D0), the total amortized cost of n operations is an upper
bound on the total actual cost. The worst-case cost of n operations is
therefore O(n).

Incrementing a binary counter

As another example of the potential method, we revisit incrementing a

k-bit binary counter. This time, the potential of the counter after the ith

INCREMENT operation is defined to be the number of 1-bits in the

counter after the ith operation, which we'll denote by bi.

Here is how to compute the amortized cost of an INCREMENT

operation. Suppose that the ith INCREMENT operation resets ti bits
to 0. The actual cost ci of the operation is therefore at most ti + 1, since
in addition to resetting ti bits, it sets at most one bit to 1. If bi = 0, then
the ith operation had reset all k bits to 0, and so bi-1 = ti = k. If bi > 0,
then bi = bi-1 -ti +1. In either case, bi bi-1 - ti + 1, and the potential

difference is

(Di) - (Di-1) (bi-1 - ti + 1) - bi-1
= 1 - ti.

The amortized cost is therefore

i = ci + (Di) - (Di-1)
(ti + 1) + (1 - ti)

= 2.

If the counter starts at 0, then (D0) = 0. Since (Di) 0 for all i, the
total amortized cost of a sequence of n INCREMENT operations is an
upper bound on the total actual cost, and so the worst-case cost of n
INCREMENT operations is O(n).

The potential method provides a simple and clever way to analyze

the counter even when it does not start at 0. The counter starts with b0
1-bits, and after n INCREMENT operations it has bn 1-bits, where 0
b0, bn k. Rewrite equation (16.3) as

Since (D0) = b0, (Dn) = bn, and i 2 for all 1 i n, the total
actual cost of n INCREMENT operations is

In particular, b0 k means that as long as k = O(n), the total actual cost
is O(n). In other words, if at least n = (k) INCREMENT operations
occur, the total actual cost is O(n), no matter what initial value the

counter contains.

Exercises

16.3-1
Suppose you have a potential function such that (Di) (D0) for
all i, but (D0) 0. Show that there exists a potential function such
that (D0) = 0, (Di) 0 for all i 1, and the amortized costs using

are the same as the amortized costs using .

16.3-2

Redo Exercise 16.1-3 using a potential method of analysis.

16.3-3

Consider an ordinary binary min-heap data structure supporting the

instructions INSERT and EXTRACT-MIN that, when there are n items
in the heap, implements each operation in O(lg n) worst-case time. Give
a potential function such that the amortized cost of INSERT is O(lg
n) and the amortized cost of EXTRACT-MIN is O(1), and show that

your potential function yields these amortized time bounds. Note that

in the analysis, n is the number of items currently in the heap, and you

do not know a bound on the maximum number of items that can ever
be stored in the heap.

16.3-4
What is the total cost of executing n of the stack operations PUSH,
POP, and MULTIPOP, assuming that the stack begins with s0 objects
and finishes with sn objects?

16.3-5

Show how to implement a queue with two ordinary stacks (Exercise
10.1-7) so that the amortized cost of each ENQUEUE and each

DEQUEUE operation is O(1).

16.3-6

Design a data structure to support the following two operations for a

dynamic multiset S of integers, which allows duplicate values:

INSERT(S, x) inserts x into S.

DELETE-LARGER-HALF(S) deletes the largest |S|/2 elements from
S.

Explain how to implement this data structure so that any sequence of m
INSERT and DELETE-LARGER-HALF operations runs in O(m) time.

Your implementation should also include a way to output the elements

of S in O(|S|) time.