16.4 Dynamic tables

When you design an application that uses a table, you do not always
know in advance how many items the table will hold. You might allocate
space for the table, only to find out later that it is not enough. The
program must then reallocate the table with a larger size and copy all
items stored in the original table over into the new, larger table.
Similarly, if many items have been deleted from the table, it might be
worthwhile to reallocate the table with a smaller size. This section
studies this problem of dynamically expanding and contracting a table.
Amortized analyses will show that the amortized cost of insertion and

deletion is only O(1), even though the actual cost of an operation is

large when it triggers an expansion or a contraction. Moreover, you'll
see how to guarantee that the unused space in a dynamic table never
exceeds a constant fraction of the total space.

Let's assume that the dynamic table supports the operations
TABLE-INSERT and TABLE-DELETE. TABLE-INSERT inserts into

the table an item that occupies a single slot, that is, a space for one item.

Likewise, TABLE-DELETE removes an item from the table, thereby
freeing a slot. The details of the data-structuring method used to
organize the table are unimportant: it could be a stack (Section 10.1.3),
a heap (Chapter 6), a hash table (Chapter 11), or something else.

It is convenient to use a concept introduced in Section 11.2, where

we analyzed hashing. The load factor (T) of a nonempty table T is

defined as the number of items stored in the table divided by the size
(number of slots) of the table. An empty table (one with no slots) has
size 0, and its load factor is defined to be 1. If the load factor of a
dynamic table is bounded below by a constant, the unused space in the
table is never more than a constant fraction of the total amount of
space.

We start by analyzing a dynamic table that allows only insertion and
then move on to the more general case that supports both insertion and
deletion.

16.4.1 Table expansion

Let's assume that storage for a table is allocated as an array of slots. A
table fills up when all slots have been used or, equivalently, when its load
factor is 1.1 In some software environments, upon an attempt to insert
an item into a full table, the only alternative is to abort with an error.
The scenario in this section assumes, however, that the software
environment, like many modern ones, provides a memory-management
system that can allocate and free blocks of storage on request. Thus,

upon inserting an item into a full table, the system can expand the table

by allocating a new table with more slots than the old table had.
Because the table must always reside in contiguous memory, the system
must allocate a new array for the larger table and then copy items from
the old table into the new table.

A common heuristic allocates a new table with twice as many slots as
the old one. If the only table operations are insertions, then the load
factor of the table is always at least 1/2, and thus the amount of wasted
space never exceeds half the total space in the table.

The TABLE-INSERT procedure on the following page assumes that

T is an object representing the table. The attribute T.table contains a
pointer to the block of storage representing the table, T.num contains
the number of items in the table, and T.size gives the total number of
slots in the table. Initially, the table is empty: T.num = T.size = 0.

There are two types of insertion here: the TABLE-INSERT

procedure itself and the elementary insertion into a table in lines 6 and

10. We can analyze the running time of TABLE-INSERT in terms of
the number of elementary insertions by assigning a cost of 1 to each
elementary insertion. In most computing environments, the overhead
for allocating an initial table in line 2 is constant and the overhead for
allocating and freeing storage in lines 5 and 7 is dominated by the cost
of transfer-ring items in line 6. Thus, the actual running time of
TABLE-INSERT is linear in the number of elementary insertions. An

expansion occurs when lines 59 execute.

TABLE-INSERT(T, x)

1if T.size == 0
2 allocate T.table with 1 slot
3 T.size = 1
4if T.num == T.size
5 allocate new-table with 2 · T.size slots
6 insert all items in T.table into new-table
7 free T.table
8 T.table = new-table
9 T.size = 2 · T.size
10insert x into T.table
11T.num = T.num + 1

Now, we'll use all three amortized analysis techniques to analyze a

sequence of n TABLE-INSERT operations on an initially empty table.
First, we need to determine the actual cost ci of the ith operation. If the

current table has room for the new item (or if this is the first operation),

then ci = 1, since the only elementary insertion performed is the one in

line 10. If the current table is full, however, and an expansion occurs,

then ci = i: the cost is 1 for the elementary insertion in line 10 plus i - 1
for the items copied from the old table to the new table in line 6. For n
operations, the worst-case cost of an operation is O(n), which leads to
an upper bound of O(n2) on the total running time for n operations.

This bound is not tight, because the table rarely expands in the

course of n TABLE-INSERT operations. Specifically, the ith operation
causes an expansion only when i - 1 is an exact power of 2. The
amortized cost of an operation is in fact O(1), as an aggregate analysis
shows. The cost of the ith operation is

The total cost of n TABLE-INSERT operations is therefore

because at most n operations cost 1 each and the costs of the remaining
operations form a geometric series. Since the total cost of n TABLEINSERT operations is bounded by 3n, the amortized cost of a single

operation is at most 3.

Figure 16.3 Analysis of table expansion by the accounting method. Each call of TABLEINSERT charges $3 as follows: $1 to pay for the elementary insertion, $1 on the item inserted
as prepayment for it to be reinserted later, and $1 on an item that was already in the table, also
as prepayment for reinsertion. (a) The table immediately after an expansion, with 8 slots, 4
items (tan slots), and no stored credit. (b)(e) After each of 4 calls to TABLE-INSERT, the
table has one more item, with $1 stored on the new item and $1 stored on one of the 4 items
that were present immediately after the expansion. Slots with these new items are blue. (f)
Upon the next call to TABLE-INSERT, the table is full, and so it expands again. Each item
had $1 to pay for it to be reinserted. Now the table looks as it did in part (a), with no stored
credit but 16 slots and 8 items.

The accounting method can provide some intuition for why the
amortized cost of a TABLE-INSERT operation should be 3. You can
think of each item paying for three elementary insertions: inserting
itself into the current table, moving itself the next time that the table
expands, and moving some other item that was already in the table the
next time that the table expands. For example, suppose that the size of

the table is m immediately after an expansion, as shown in Figure 16.3
for m = 8. Then the table holds m/2 items, and it contains no credit.

Each call of TABLE-INSERT charges $3. The elementary insertion that
occurs immediately costs $1. Another $1 resides on the item inserted as

credit. The third $1 resides as credit on one of the m/2 items already in
the table. The table will not fill again until another m/2 - 1 items have
been inserted, and thus, by the time the table contains m items and is

full, each item has $1 on it to pay for it to be reinserted it during the
expansion.

Now, let's see how to use the potential method. We'll use it again in

Section 16.4.2 to design a TABLE-DELETE operation that has an O(1)

amortized cost as well. Just as the accounting method had no stored

credit immediately after an expansion--that is, when T.num = T.size/2
--let's define the potential to be 0 when T.num = T.size/2. As

elementary insertions occur, the potential needs to increase enough to
pay for all the reinsertions that will happen when the table next

expands. The table fills after another T.size/2 calls of TABLE-INSERT,
when T.num = T.size. The next call of TABLE-INSERT after these
T.size/2 calls triggers an expansion with a cost of T.size to reinsert all
the items. Therefore, over the course of T.size/2 calls of TABLEINSERT, the potential must increase from 0 to T.size. To achieve this

increase, let's design the potential so that each call of TABLE-INSERT
increases it by

until the table expands. You can see that the potential function

equals 0 immediately after the table expands, when T.num = T.size/2,

and it increases by 2 upon each insertion until the table fills. Once the

table fills, that is, when T.num = T.size, the potential (T) equals T.size.

The initial value of the potential is 0, and since the table is always at

least half full, T.num T.size/2, which implies that (T) is always
nonnegative. Thus, the sum of the amortized costs of n TABLE-

INSERT operations gives an upper bound on the sum of the actual
costs.

To analyze the amortized costs of table operations, it is convenient
to think in terms of the change in potential due to each operation.

Letting i denote the potential after the ith operation, we can rewrite

equation (16.2) as

i = ci + i - i-1
= ci + i,

where i is the change in potential due to the ith operation. First,
consider the case when the ith insertion does not cause the table to
expand. In this case, i is 2. Since the actual cost ci is 1, the amortized

cost is

i = ci + i

=1+2

= 3.

Now, consider the change in potential when the table does expand

during the ith insertion because it was full immediately before the
insertion. Let numi denote the number of items stored in the table after
the ith operation and sizei denote the total size of the table after the ith
operation, so that sizei-1 = numi-1 = i - 1 and therefore i-1 =
2(sizei-1 - sizei-1/2) = sizei-1 = i - 1. Immediately after the

expansion, the potential goes down to 0, and then the new item is

inserted, causing the potential to increase to i = 2. Thus, when the ith
insertion triggers an expansion, i = 2 - (i - 1) = 3 - i. When the
table expands in the ith TABLE-INSERT operation, the actual cost ci
equals i (to reinsert i - 1 items and insert the ith item), giving an

amortized cost of

i = ci + i
= i + (3 - i)

= 3.

Figure 16.4 plots the values of numi, sizei, and i against i. Notice how

the potential builds to pay for expanding the table.

Figure 16.4 The effect of a sequence of n TABLE-INSERT operations on the number numi of
items in the table (the brown line), the number sizei of slots in the table (the blue line), and the
potential i = 2(numi - sizei/2) (the red line), each being measured after the ith operation.

Immediately before an expansion, the potential has built up to the number of items in the table,
and therefore it can pay for moving all the items to the new table. Afterward, the potential
drops to 0, but it immediately increases by 2 upon insertion of the item that caused the
expansion.

16.4.2 Table expansion and contraction

To implement a TABLE-DELETE operation, it is simple enough to
remove the specified item from the table. In order to limit the amount of

wasted space, however, you might want to contract the table when the

load factor becomes too small. Table contraction is analogous to table
expansion: when the number of items in the table drops too low, allocate
a new, smaller table and then copy the items from the old table into the
new one. You can then free the storage for the old table by returning it
to the memory-management system. In order to not waste space, yet
keep the amortized costs low, the insertion and deletion procedures
should preserve two properties:

the load factor of the dynamic table is bounded below by a
positive constant, as well as above by 1, and

the amortized cost of a table operation is bounded above by a
constant.

The actual cost of each operation equals the number of elementary
insertions or deletions.

You might think that if you double the table size upon inserting an
item into a full table, then you should halve the size when deleting an
item that would cause the table to become less than half full. This
strategy does indeed guarantee that the load factor of the table never
drops below 1/2. Unfortunately, it can also cause the amortized cost of
an operation to be quite large. Consider the following scenario. Perform

n operations on a table T of size n/2, where n is an exact power of 2. The
first n/2 operations are insertions, which by our previous analysis cost a
total of (n). At the end of this sequence of insertions, T.num = T.size =
n/2. For the second n/2 operations, perform the following sequence:

insert, delete, delete, insert, insert, delete, delete, insert, insert,
....

The first insertion causes the table to expand to size n. The two
deletions that follow cause the table to contract back to size n/2. Two

further insertions cause another expansion, and so forth. The cost of

each expansion and contraction is (n), and there are (n) of them.
Thus, the total cost of the n operations is (n2), making the amortized
cost of an operation (n).

The problem with this strategy is that after the table expands, not
enough deletions occur to pay for a contraction. Likewise, after the
table contracts, not enough insertions take place to pay for an
expansion.

How can we solve this problem? Allow the load factor of the table to
drop below 1/2. Specifically, continue to double the table size upon
inserting an item into a full table, but halve the table size when deleting
an item causes the table to become less than 1/4 full, rather than 1/2 full
as before. The load factor of the table is therefore bounded below by
the constant 1/4, and the load factor is 1/2 immediately after a
contraction.

An expansion or contraction should exhaust all the built-up
potential, so that immediately after expansion or contraction, when the
load factor is 1/2, the table's potential is 0. Figure 16.5 shows the idea.
As the load factor deviates from 1/2, the potential increases so that by
the time an expansion or contraction occurs, the table has garnered
sufficient potential to pay for copying all the items into the newly

allocated table. Thus, the potential function should grow to T.num by

the time that the load factor has either increased to 1 or decreased to
1/4. Immediately after either expanding or contracting the table, the
load factor goes back to 1/2 and the table's potential reduces back to 0.

Figure 16.5 How to think about the potential function for table insertion and deletion. When
the load factor is 1/2, the potential is 0. In order to accumulate sufficient potential to pay for

reinserting all T.size items when the table fills, the potential needs to increase by 2 upon each

insertion when 1/2. Correspondingly, the potential decreases by 2 upon each deletion that

leaves 1/2. In order to accrue enough potential to cover the cost of reinserting all T.size/4

items when the table contracts, the potential needs to increase by 1 upon each deletion when
< 1/2, and correspondingly the potential decreases by 1 upon each insertion that leaves <
1/2. The red area represents load factors less than 1/4, which are not allowed.

We omit the code for TABLE-DELETE, since it is analogous to
TABLE-INSERT. We assume that if a contraction occurs during
TABLE-DELETE, it occurs after the item is deleted from the table. The
analysis assumes that whenever the number of items in the table drops

to 0, the table occupies no storage. That is, if T.num = 0, then T.size = 0.

How do we design a potential function that gives constant amortized
time for both insertion and deletion? When the load factor is at least

1/2, the same potential function, (T) = 2(T.num - T.size/2), that we

used for insertion still works. When the table is at least half full, each
insertion increases the potential by 2 if the table does not expand, and
each deletion reduces the potential by 2 if it does not cause the load
factor to drop below 1/2.

What about when the load factor is less than 1/2, that is, when 1/4

(T) < 1/2? As before, when (T) = 1/2, so that T.num = T.size/2, the
potential (T) should be 0. To get the load factor from 1/2 down to 1/4,
T.size/4 deletions need to occur, at which time T.num = T.size/4. To pay
for all the reinsertions, the potential must increase from 0 to T.size/4
over these T.size/4 deletions. Therefore, for each call of TABLE-

DELETE until the table contracts, the potential should increase by

Likewise, when < 1/2, each call of TABLE-INSERT should decrease

the potential by 1. When 1/4 (T) < 1/2, the potential function
(T) = T.size/2 - T.num

produces this desired behavior.
Putting the two cases together, we get the potential function

The potential of an empty table is 0 and the potential is never negative.
Thus, the total amortized cost of a sequence of operations with respect
to provides an upper bound on the actual cost of the sequence.
Figure 16.6 illustrates how the potential function behaves over a
sequence of insertions and deletions.

Now, let's determine the amortized costs of each operation. As

before, let numi denote the number of items stored in the table after the
ith operation, sizei denote the total size of the table after the ith
operation, i = numi/sizei denote the load factor after the ith operation,
i denote the potential after the ith operation, and i denote the

change in potential due to the ith operation. Initially, num0 = 0, size0 =

0, and 0 = 0.
The cases in which the table does not expand or contract and the

load factor does not cross = 1/2 are straightforward. As we have seen,

if i-1 1/2 and the ith operation is an insertion that does not cause
the table to expand, then i = 2. Likewise, if the ith operation is a
deletion and i 1/2, then i = -2. Furthermore, if i-1 < 1/2 and the
ith operation is a deletion that does not trigger a contraction, then i
= 1, and if the ith operation is an insertion and i < 1/2, then i = -1.

In other words, if no expansion or contraction occurs and the load
factor does not cross = 1/2, then

if the load factor stays at or above 1/2, then the potential
increases by 2 for an insertion and decreases by 2 for a deletion,
and

if the load factor stays below 1/2, then the potential increases by 1
for a deletion and decreases by 1 for an insertion.

In each of these cases, the actual cost ci of the ith operation is just 1,

and so

Figure 16.6 The effect of a sequence of n TABLE-INSERT and TABLE-DELETE operations
on the number numi of items in the table (the brown line), the number sizei of slots in the table

(the blue line), and the potential (the red line)

where i = numi/sizei, each measured after the ith operation. Immediately before an expansion

or contraction, the potential has built up to the number of items in the table, and therefore it
can pay for moving all the items to the new table.

if the ith operation is an insertion, its amortized cost i is ci +
i, which is 1 + 2 = 3 if the load factor stays at or above 1/2, and

1 + (-1) = 0 if the load factor stays below 1/2, and

if the ith operation is a deletion, its amortized cost i is ci + i,

which is 1 + (-2) = -1 if the load factor stays at or above 1/2, and
1 + 1 = 2 if the load factor stays below 1/2.

Four cases remain: an insertion that takes the load factor from below
1/2 to 1/2, a deletion that takes the load factor from 1/2 to below 1/2, a
deletion that causes the table to contract, and an insertion that causes
the table to expand. We analyzed that last case at the end of Section
16.4.1 to show that its amortized cost is 3.

When the ith operation is a deletion that causes the table to
contract, we have numi-1 = sizei-1/4 before the contraction, then the
item is deleted, and finally numi = sizei/2 - 1 after the contraction.

Thus, by equation (16.5) we have

i-1 = sizei-1/2 - numi-1
= sizei-1/2 - sizei-1/4
= sizei-1/4,

which also equals the actual cost ci of deleting one item and copying
sizei-1/4 - 1 items into the new, smaller table. Since numi = sizei/2 - 1
after the operation has completed, i < 1/2, and so

i = sizei/2 - numi

= 1,

giving i = 1 - sizei-1/4. Therefore, when the ith operation is a

deletion that triggers a contraction, its amortized cost is

i = ci + i
= sizei-1/4 + (1 - sizei-1/4)

= 1.

Finally, we handle the cases where the load factor fits one case of
equation (16.5) before the operation and the other case afterward. We

start with deletion, where we have numi-1 = sizei-1/2, so that i-1 =
1/2, beforehand, and numi = sizei/2-1, so that i < 1/2 afterward.
Because i-1 = 1/2, we have i-1 = 0, and because i < 1/2, we have i
= sizei/2 - numi = 1. Thus we get that i = 1 - 0 = 1. Since the ith

operation is a deletion that does not cause a contraction, the actual cost

ci equals 1, and the amortized cost i is ci + i = 1 + 1 = 2.
Conversely, if the ith operation is an insertion that takes the load

factor from below 1/2 to equaling 1/2, the change in potential i

equals -1. Again, the actual cost ci is 1, and now the amortized cost i
is ci + i = 1 + (-1) = 0.

In summary, since the amortized cost of each operation is bounded

above by a constant, the actual time for any sequence of n operations
on a dynamic table is O(n).

Exercises

16.4-1

Using the potential method, analyze the amortized cost of the first table
insertion.

16.4-2

You wish to implement a dynamic, open-address hash table. Why might
you consider the table to be full when its load factor reaches some value
that is strictly less than 1? Describe briefly how to make insertion into
a dynamic, open-address hash table run in such a way that the expected

value of the amortized cost per insertion is O(1). Why is the expected
value of the actual cost per insertion not necessarily O(1) for all

insertions?

16.4-3

Discuss how to use the accounting method to analyze both the
insertion and deletion operations, assuming that the table doubles in
size when its load factor exceeds 1 and the table halves in size when its
load factor goes below 1/4.

16.4-4

Suppose that instead of contracting a table by halving its size when its
load factor drops below 1/4, you contract the table by multiplying its
size by 2/3 when its load factor drops below 1/3. Using the potential
function

(T) = |2(T.num - T.size/2)|,

show that the amortized cost of a TABLE-DELETE that uses this
strategy is bounded above by a constant.

Problems

16-1 Binary reflected Gray code

A binary Gray code represents a sequence of nonnegative integers in

binary such that to go from one integer to the next, exactly one bit flips

every time. The binary reflected Gray code represents a sequence of the
integers 0 to 2k - 1 for some positive integer k according to the

following recursive method:

For k = 1, the binary reflected Gray code is 0, 1.

For k 2, first form the binary reflected Gray code for k - 1,
giving the 2k-1 integers 0 to 2k-1 - 1. Then form the reflection

of this sequence, which is just the sequence in reverse. (That is, the

j th integer in the sequence becomes the (2k-1 - j - 1)st integer
in the reflection). Next, add 2k-1 to each of the 2k-1 integers in

the reflected sequence. Finally, concatenate the two sequences.

For example, for k = 2, first form the binary reflected Gray code 0,
1 for k = 1. Its reflection is the sequence 1, 0. Adding 2k-1 = 2 to

each integer in the reflection gives the sequence 3, 2. Concatenating
the two sequences gives 0, 1, 3, 2 or, in binary, 00, 01, 11, 10, so that

each integer differs from its predecessor by exactly one bit. For k = 3,
the reflection of the binary reflected Gray code for k = 2 is 2, 3, 1, 0
and adding 2k-1 = 4 gives 6, 7, 5, 4. Concatenating produces the

sequence 0, 1, 3, 2, 6, 7, 5, 4, which in binary is 000, 001, 011, 010,
110, 111, 101,100. In the binary reflected Gray code, only one bit flips
even when wrapping around from the last integer to the first.

a. Index the integers in a binary reflected Gray code from 0 to 2k - 1,
and consider the ith integer in the binary reflected Gray code. To go
from the (i -1)st integer to the ith integer in the binary reflected Gray

code, exactly one bit flips. Show how to determine which bit flips,

given the index i.

b. Assuming that given a bit number j, you can flip bit j of an integer in

constant time, show how to compute the entire binary reflected Gray

code sequence of 2k numbers in (2k) time.

16-2 Making binary search dynamic

Binary search of a sorted array takes logarithmic search time, but the

time to insert a new element is linear in the size of the array. You can

improve the time for insertion by keeping several sorted arrays.

Specifically, suppose that you wish to support SEARCH and

INSERT on a set of n elements. Let k = lg(n + 1), and let the binary
representation of n be nk-1, nk-2, ... , n0. Maintain k sorted arrays
A0, A1, ... , Ak-1, where for i = 0, 1, ... , k - 1, the length of array Ai is
2i. Each array is either full or empty, depending on whether ni = 1 or ni
= 0, respectively. The total number of elements held in all k arrays is

therefore . Although each individual array is sorted,

elements in different arrays bear no particular relationship to each

other.

a. Describe how to perform the SEARCH operation for this data

structure. Analyze its worst-case running time.

b. Describe how to perform the INSERT operation. Analyze its worst-

case and amortized running times, assuming that the only operations
are INSERT and SEARCH.

c. Describe how to implement DELETE. Analyze its worst-case and

amortized running times, assuming that there can be DELETE,
INSERT, and SEARCH operations.

16-3 Amortized weight-balanced trees

Consider an ordinary binary search tree augmented by adding to each

node x the attribute x.size, which gives the number of keys stored in the
subtree rooted at x. Let be a constant in the range 1/2 < 1. We say
that a given node x is -balanced if x.left.size · x.size and x.right.size
· x.size. The tree as a whole is -balanced if every node in the tree is

-balanced. The following amortized approach to maintaining weightbalanced trees was suggested by G. Varghese.

a. A 1/2-balanced tree is, in a sense, as balanced as it can be. Given a
node x in an arbitrary binary search tree, show how to rebuild the
subtree rooted at x so that it becomes 1/2-balanced. Your algorithm
should run in (x.size) time, and it can use O(x.size) auxiliary storage.

b. Show that performing a search in an n-node -balanced binary search
tree takes O(lg n) worst-case time.

For the remainder of this problem, assume that the constant is strictly
greater than 1/2. Suppose that you implement INSERT and DELETE

as usual for an n-node binary search tree, except that after every such

operation, if any node in the tree is no longer -balanced, then you
"rebuild" the subtree rooted at the highest such node in the tree so that
it becomes 1/2-balanced.

We'll analyze this rebuilding scheme using the potential method. For

a node x in a binary search tree T, define
(x) = |x.left.size - x.right.size|.

Define the potential of T as

where c is a sufficiently large constant that depends on .

c. Argue that any binary search tree has nonnegative potential and also

that a 1/2-balanced tree has potential 0.

d. Suppose that m units of potential can pay for rebuilding an m-node
subtree. How large must c be in terms of in order for it to take O(1)

amortized time to rebuild a subtree that is not -balanced?

e. Show that inserting a node into or deleting a node from an n-node -
balanced tree costs O(lg n) amortized time.

16-4 The cost of restructuring red-black trees

There are four basic operations on red-black trees that perform

structural modifications: node insertions, node deletions, rotations, and

color changes. We have seen that RB-INSERT and RB-DELETE use

only O(1) rotations, node insertions, and node deletions to maintain the

red-black properties, but they may make many more color changes.

a. Describe a legal red-black tree with n nodes such that calling RB-
INSERT to add the (n + 1)st node causes (lg n) color changes. Then
describe a legal red-black tree with n nodes for which calling RB-
DELETE on a particular node causes (lg n) color changes.

Although the worst-case number of color changes per operation can be

logarithmic, you will prove that any sequence of m RB-INSERT and

RB-DELETE operations on an initially empty red-black tree causes

O(m) structural modifications in the worst case.

b. Some of the cases handled by the main loop of the code of both RB-
INSERT-FIXUP and RB-DELETE-FIXUP are terminating: once

encountered, they cause the loop to terminate after a constant
number of additional operations. For each of the cases of RB-
INSERT-FIXUP and RB-DELETE-FIXUP, specify which are

terminating and which are not. (Hint: Look at Figures 13.5, 13.6, and

13.7 in Sections 13.3 and 13.4.)

You will first analyze the structural modifications when only insertions

are performed. Let T be a red-black tree, and define (T) to be the
number of red nodes in T. Assume that one unit of potential can pay for

the structural modifications performed by any of the three cases of RBINSERT-FIXUP.

c. Let T be the result of applying Case 1 of RB-INSERT-FIXUP to T.
Argue that (T) = (T) - 1.

d. We can break the operation of the RB-INSERT procedure into three

parts. List the structural modifications and potential changes
resulting from lines 116 of RB-INSERT, from nonterminating cases
of RB-INSERT-FIXUP, and from terminating cases of RB-INSERT-
FIXUP.

e. Using part (d), argue that the amortized number of structural
modifications performed by any call of RB-INSERT is O(1).

Next you will prove that there are O(m) structural modifications when
both insertions and deletions occur. Define, for each node x,

Now redefine the potential of a red-black tree T as

and let T be the tree that results from applying any nonterminating
case of RB-INSERT-FIXUP or RB-DELETE-FIXUP to T.
f. Show that (T) (T) - 1 for all nonterminating cases of RB-

INSERT-FIXUP. Argue that the amortized number of structural

modifications performed by any call of RB-INSERT-FIXUP is O(1).
g. Show that (T) (T) - 1 for all nonterminating cases of RB-

DELETE-FIXUP. Argue that the amortized number of structural

modifications performed by any call of RB-DELETE-FIXUP is O(1).
h. Complete the proof that in the worst case, any sequence of m RB-

INSERT and RB-DELETE operations performs O(m) structural

modifications.

Chapter notes

Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5] used aggregate analysis to determine the
running time of operations on a disjoint-set forest. We'll analyze this
data structure using the potential method in Chapter 19. Tarjan [430]
surveys the accounting and potential methods of amortized analysis
and presents several applications. He attributes the accounting method
to several authors, including M. R. Brown, R. E. Tarjan, S. Huddleston,

and K. Mehlhorn. He attributes the potential method to D. D. Sleator.
The term "amortized" is due to D. D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan.

Potential functions are also useful for proving lower bounds for
certain types of problems. For each configuration of the problem, define
a potential function that maps the configuration to a real number. Then
determine the potential init of the initial configuration, the potential
final of the final configuration, and the maximum change in potential
max due to any step. The number of steps must therefore be at least |
final - init| / | max|. Examples of potential functions to prove
lower bounds in I/O complexity appear in works by Cormen, Sundquist,
and Wisniewski [105], Floyd [146], and Aggarwal and Vitter [3].
Krumme, Cybenko, and Venkataraman [271] applied potential functions

to prove lower bounds on gossiping: communicating a unique item from

each vertex in a graph to every other vertex.

1 In some situations, such as an open-address hash table, it's better to consider a table to be
full if its load factor equals some constant strictly less than 1. (See Exercise 16.4-2.)

Part V Advanced Data Structures

Introduction

This part returns to studying data structures that support operations
on dynamic sets, but at a more advanced level than Part III. One of the
chapters, for example, makes extensive use of the amortized analysis
techniques from Chapter 16.

Chapter 17 shows how to augment red-black trees--adding
additional information in each node--to support dynamic-set
operations in addition to those covered in Chapters 12 and 13. The first
example augments red-black trees to dynamically maintain order
statistics for a set of keys. Another example augments them in a
different way to maintain intervals of real numbers. Chapter 17 includes
a theorem giving sufficient conditions for when a red-black tree can be

augmented while maintaining the O(lg n) running times for insertion

and deletion.
Chapter 18 presents B-trees, which are balanced search trees

specifically designed to be stored on disks. Since disks operate much
more slowly than random-access memory, B-tree performance depends
not only on how much computing time the dynamic-set operations
consume but also on how many disk accesses they perform. For each Btree operation, the number of disk accesses increases with the height of
the B-tree, but B-tree operations keep the height low.

Chapter 19 examines data structures for disjoint sets. Starting with a

universe of n elements, each initially in its own singleton set, the
operation UNION unites two sets. At all times, the n elements are

partitioned into disjoint sets, even as calls to the UNION operation

change the members of a set dynamically. The query FIND-SET
identifies the unique set that contains a given element at the moment.
Representing each set as a simple rooted tree yields surprisingly fast

operations: a sequence of m operations runs in O(m(n)) time, where
(n) is an incredibly slowly growing function--(n) is at most 4 in any

conceivable application. The amortized analysis that proves this time
bound is as complex as the data structure is simple.

The topics covered in this part are by no means the only examples of
"advanced" data structures. Other advanced data structures include the
following:

Fibonacci heaps [156] implement mergeable heaps (see Problem

10-2 on page 268) with the operations INSERT, MINIMUM, and

UNION taking only O(1) actual and amortized time, and the
operations EXTRACT-MIN and DELETE taking O(lg n)

amortized time. The most significant advantage of these data

structures, however, is that DECREASE-KEY takes only O(1)
amortized time. Strict Fibonacci heaps [73], developed later, made

all of these time bounds actual. Because the DECREASE-KEY
operation takes constant amortized time, (strict) Fibonacci heaps
constitute key components of some of the asymptotically fastest
algorithms to date for graph problems.

Dynamic trees [415, 429] maintain a forest of disjoint rooted trees.

Each edge in each tree has a real-valued cost. Dynamic trees
support queries to find parents, roots, edge costs, and the
minimum edge cost on a simple path from a node up to a root.
Trees may be manipulated by cutting edges, updating all edge
costs on a simple path from a node up to a root, linking a root
into another tree, and making a node the root of the tree it

appears in. One implementation of dynamic trees gives an O(lg n)

amortized time bound for each operation, while a more

complicated implementation yields O(lg n) worst-case time

bounds. Dynamic trees are used in some of the asymptotically
fastest network-flow algorithms.

Splay trees [418, 429] are a form of binary search tree on which
the standard search-tree operations run in O(lg n) amortized time.

One application of splay trees simplifies dynamic trees.

Persistent data structures allow queries, and sometimes updates as

well, on past versions of a data structure. For example, linked data
structures can be made persistent with only a small time and
space cost [126]. Problem 13-1 gives a simple example of a
persistent dynamic set.

Several data structures allow a faster implementation of
dictionary operations (INSERT, DELETE, and SEARCH) for a
restricted universe of keys. By taking advantage of these
restrictions, they are able to achieve better worst-case asymptotic
running times than comparison-based data structures. If the keys

are unique integers drawn from the set {0, 1, 2, ... , u - 1}, where
u is an exact power of 2, then a recursive data structure known as
a van Emde Boas tree [440, 441] supports each of the operations

SEARCH, INSERT, DELETE, MINIMUM, MAXIMUM,

SUCCESSOR, and PREDECESSOR in O(lg lg u) time. Fusion
trees [157] were the first data structure to allow faster dictionary

operations when the universe is restricted to integers,

implementing these operations in O(lg n/lg lg n) time. Several
subsequent data structures, including exponential search trees [17],

have also given improved bounds on some or all of the dictionary
operations and are mentioned in the chapter notes throughout
this book.

Dynamic graph data structures support various queries while

allowing the structure of a graph to change through operations
that insert or delete vertices or edges. Examples of the queries
that they support include vertex connectivity [214], edge
connectivity, minimum spanning trees [213], biconnectivity, and
transitive closure [212].

Chapter notes throughout this book mention additional data
structures.

17 Augmenting Data Structures

Some solutions require no more than a "textbook" data structure--
such as a doubly linked list, a hash table, or a binary search tree--but
many others require a dash of creativity. Rarely will you need to create
an entirely new type of data structure, though. More often, you can
augment a textbook data structure by storing additional information in
it. You can then program new operations for the data structure to
support your application. Augmenting a data structure is not always
straightforward, however, since the added information must be updated
and maintained by the ordinary operations on the data structure.

This chapter discusses two data structures based on red-black trees
that are augmented with additional information. Section 17.1 describes
a data structure that supports general order-statistic operations on a

dynamic set: quickly finding the ith smallest number or the rank of a

given element. Section 17.2 abstracts the process of augmenting a data
structure and provides a theorem that you can use when augmenting
red-black trees. Section 17.3 uses this theorem to help design a data
structure for maintaining a dynamic set of intervals, such as time
intervals. You can use this data structure to quickly find an interval that
overlaps a given query interval.