17.3 Interval trees

This section shows how to augment red-black trees to support
operations on dynamic sets of intervals. In this section, we'll assume
that intervals are closed. Extending the results to open and half-open
intervals is conceptually straightforward. (See page 1157 for definitions
of closed, open, and half-open intervals.)

Intervals are convenient for representing events that each occupy a
continuous period of time. For example, you could query a database of
time intervals to find out which events occurred during a given interval.
The data structure in this section provides an efficient means for
maintaining such an interval database.

A simple way to represent an interval [t1, t2] is as an object i with
attributes i.low = t1 (the low endpoint) and i.high = t2 (the high
endpoint). We say that intervals i and i overlap if i i , that is, if i.low
i.high and i.low i.high.

Figure 17.3 The interval trichotomy for two closed intervals i and i. (a) If i and i overlap,
there are four situations, and in each, i.low i.high and i.low i.high. (b) The intervals do not
overlap, and i.high < i.low. (c) The intervals do not overlap, and i.high < i.low.

As Figure 17.3 shows, any two intervals i and i satisfy the interval
trichotomy, that is, exactly one of the following three properties holds:

a. i and i overlap,

b. i is to the left of i (i.e., i.high < i.low),

c. i is to the right of i (i.e., i.high < i.low).

An interval tree is a red-black tree that maintains a dynamic set of
elements, with each element x containing an interval x.int. Interval trees

support the following operations:

INTERVAL-INSERT(T, x) adds the element x, whose int attribute is
assumed to contain an interval, to the interval tree T.

INTERVAL-DELETE(T, x) removes the element x from the interval
tree T.

INTERVAL-SEARCH(T, i) returns a pointer to an element x in the
interval tree T such that x.int overlaps interval i, or a pointer to the
sentinel T.nil if no such element belongs to the set.

Figure 17.4 shows how an interval tree represents a set of intervals. The
four-step method from Section 17.2 will guide our design of an interval
tree and the operations that run on it.

Step 1: Underlying data structure

A red-black tree serves as the underlying data structure. Each node x
contains an interval x.int. The key of x is the low endpoint, x.int.low, of

the interval. Thus, an inorder tree walk of the data structure lists the
intervals in sorted order by low endpoint.

Figure 17.4 An interval tree. (a) A set of 10 intervals, shown sorted bottom to top by left

endpoint. (b) The interval tree that represents them. Each node x contains an interval, shown

above the dashed line, and the maximum value of any interval endpoint in the subtree rooted

at x, shown below the dashed line. An inorder tree walk of the tree lists the nodes in sorted

order by left endpoint.

Step 2: Additional information

In addition to the intervals themselves, each node x contains a value
x.max, which is the maximum value of any interval endpoint stored in
the subtree rooted at x.

Step 3: Maintaining the information

We must verify that insertion and deletion take O(lg n) time on an
interval tree of n nodes. It is simple enough to determine x.max in O(1)

time, given interval x.int and the max values of node x's children:

x.max = max {x.int.high, x.left.max, x.right.max}.

Thus, by Theorem 17.1, insertion and deletion run in O(lg n) time. In

fact, you can use either Exercise 17.2-3 or 17.3-1 to show how to update

all the max attributes that change after a rotation in just O(1) time.

Step 4: Developing new operations

The only new operation is INTERVAL-SEARCH(T, i), which finds a
node in tree T whose interval overlaps interval i. If there is no interval
in the tree that overlaps i, the procedure returns a pointer to the
sentinel T.nil.

INTERVAL-SEARCH(T, i)

1 x = T.root
2 while x T.nil and i does not overlap x.int

3 if x.left T.nil and x.left.max i.low

4 x = x.left // overlap in left subtree or no overlap in right

subtree

5 else x =// no overlap in left subtree
x.right

6 return x

The search for an interval that overlaps i starts at the root of the tree

and proceeds downward. It terminates when either it finds an

overlapping interval or it reaches the sentinel T.nil. Since each iteration
of the basic loop takes O(1) time, and since the height of an n-node redblack tree is O(lg n), the INTERVAL-SEARCH procedure takes O(lg n)

time.

Before we see why INTERVAL-SEARCH is correct, let's examine

how it works on the interval tree in Figure 17.4. Let's look for an

interval that overlaps the interval i = [22, 25]. Begin with x as the root,
which contains [16, 21] and does not overlap i. Since x.left.max = 23 is
greater than i.low = 22, the loop continues with x as the left child of the
root--the node containing [8, 9], which also does not overlap i. This

time, x.left.max = 10 is less than i.low = 22, and so the loop continues
with the right child of x as the new x. Because the interval [15, 23]
stored in this node overlaps i, the procedure returns this node.

Now let's try an unsuccessful search, for an interval that overlaps i =
[11, 14] in the interval tree of Figure 17.4. Again, begin with x as the
root. Since the root's interval [16, 21] does not overlap i, and since
x.left.max = 23 is greater than i.low = 11, go left to the node containing
[8, 9]. Interval [8, 9] does not overlap i, and x.left.max = 10 is less than
i.low = 11, and so the search goes right. (No interval in the left subtree
overlaps i.) Interval [15, 23] does not overlap i, and its left child is T.nil,

so again the search goes right, the loop terminates, and INTERVAL-

SEARCH returns the sentinel T.nil.

To see why INTERVAL-SEARCH is correct, we must understand

why it suffices to examine a single path from the root. The basic idea is

that at any node x, if x.int does not overlap i, the search always

proceeds in a safe direction: the search will definitely find an

overlapping interval if the tree contains one. The following theorem

states this property more precisely.

Theorem 17.2
Any execution of INTERVAL-SEARCH(T, i) either returns a node
whose interval overlaps i, or it returns T.nil and the tree T contains no
node whose interval overlaps i.

Proof The while loop of lines 25 terminates when either x = T.nil or i
overlaps x.int. In the latter case, it is certainly correct to return x.

Therefore, we focus on the former case, in which the while loop

terminates because x = T.nil, which is the node that INTERVAL-

SEARCH returns.

We'll prove that if the procedure returns T.nil, then it did not miss
any intervals in T that overlap i. The idea is to show that whether the

search goes left in line 4 or right in line 5, it always heads toward a node

containing an interval overlapping i, if any such interval exists. In

particular, we'll prove that

1. If the search goes left in line 4, then the left subtree of node x
contains an interval that overlaps i or the right subtree of x
contains no interval that overlaps i. Therefore, even if x's left
subtree contains no interval that overlaps i but the search goes
left, it does not make a mistake, because x's right subtree does
not contain an interval overlapping i, either.

2. If the search goes right in line 5, then the left subtree of x
contains no interval that overlaps i. Thus, if the search goes

right, it does not make a mistake.

For both cases, we rely on the interval trichotomy. Let's start with
the case where the search goes right, whose proof is simpler. By the

tests in line 3, we know that x.left = T.nil or x.left.max < i.low. If x.left =
T.nil, then x's left subtree contains no interval that overlaps i, since it
contains no intervals at all. Now suppose that x.left T.nil, so that we
must have x.left.max < i.low. Consider any interval i in x's left subtree.
Because x.left.max is the maximum endpoint in x's left subtree, we have
i.high x.left.max. Thus, as Figure 17.5(a) shows,

i.high x.left.max
< i.low.

By the interval trichotomy, therefore, intervals i and i do not overlap,
and so x's left subtree contains no interval that overlaps i.

Figure 17.5 Intervals in the proof of Theorem 17.2. The value of x.left.max is shown in each
case as a dashed line. (a) The search goes right. No interval i in x's left subtree can overlap i.
(b) The search goes left. The left subtree of x contains an interval that overlaps i (situation not
shown), or x's left subtree contains an interval i such that i.high = x.left.max. Since i does not
overlap i, neither does it overlap any interval i in x's right subtree, since i.low i.low.

Now we examine the case in which the search goes left. If the left

subtree of node x contains an interval that overlaps i, we're done, so
let's assume that no node in x's left subtree overlaps i. We need to show
that in this case, no node in x's right subtree overlaps i, so that going
left will not miss any overlaps in x's right subtree. By the tests in line 3,
the left subtree of x is not empty and x.left.max i.low. By the
definition of the max attribute, x's left subtree contains some interval i

such that

i.high = x.left.max
i.low,

as illustrated in Figure 17.5(b). Since i is in x's left subtree, it does not
overlap i, and since i.high i.low, the interval trichotomy tells us that
i.high < i.low. Now we bring in the property that interval trees are keyed
on the low endpoints of intervals. Because i is in x's left subtree, we
have i.low x.int.low. Now consider any interval i in x's right subtree,
so that x.int.low i.low. Putting inequalities together, we get

i.high < i.low
x.int.low
i.low.

Because i.high < i.low, the interval trichotomy tells us that i and i do
not overlap. Since we chose i as any interval in x's right subtree, no
node in x's right subtree overlaps i.

Thus, the INTERVAL-SEARCH procedure works correctly.

Exercises

17.3-1

Write pseudocode for LEFT-ROTATE that operates on nodes in an

interval tree and updates all the max attributes that change in O(1)

time.

17.3-2

Describe an efficient algorithm that, given an interval i, returns an
interval overlapping i that has the minimum low endpoint, or T.nil if no

such interval exists.

17.3-3
Given an interval tree T and an interval i, describe how to list all
intervals in T that overlap i in O(min {n, k lg n}) time, where k is the
number of intervals in the output list. (Hint: One simple method makes

several queries, modifying the tree between queries. A slightly more
complicated method does not modify the tree.)

17.3-4

Suggest modifications to the interval-tree procedures to support the

new operation INTERVAL-SEARCH-EXACTLY(T, i), where T is an
interval tree and i is an interval. The operation should return a pointer
to a node x in T such that x.int.low = i.low and x.int.high = i.high, or
T.nil if T contains no such node. All operations, including INTERVALSEARCH-EXACTLY, should run in O(lg n) time on an n-node interval

tree.

17.3-5
Show how to maintain a dynamic set Q of numbers that supports the

operation MIN-GAP, which gives the absolute value of the difference

of the two closest numbers in Q. For example, if we have Q = {1, 5, 9,
15, 18, 22}, then MIN-GAP(Q) returns 3, since 15 and 18 are the two
closest numbers in Q. Make the operations INSERT, DELETE,

SEARCH, and MIN-GAP as efficient as possible, and analyze their
running times.

17.3-6

VLSI databases commonly represent an integrated circuit as a list of
rectangles. Assume that each rectangle is rectilinearly oriented (sides

parallel to the x- and y-axes), so that each rectangle is represented by
four values: its minimum and maximum x- and y-coordinates. Give an
O(n lg n)-time algorithm to decide whether a set of n rectangles so

represented contains two rectangles that overlap. Your algorithm need
not report all intersecting pairs, but it must report that an overlap exists

if one rectangle entirely covers another, even if the boundary lines do

not intersect. (Hint: Move a "sweep" line across the set of rectangles.)

Problems

17-1 Point of maximum overlap
You wish to keep track of a point of maximum overlap in a set of

intervals--a point with the largest number of intervals in the set that
overlap it.

a. Show that there is always a point of maximum overlap that is an

endpoint of one of the intervals.

b. Design a data structure that efficiently supports the operations

INTERVAL-INSERT, INTERVAL-DELETE, and FIND-POM,

which returns a point of maximum overlap. (Hint: Keep a red-black

tree of all the endpoints. Associate a value of +1 with each left
endpoint, and associate a value of -1 with each right endpoint.
Augment each node of the tree with some extra information to
maintain the point of maximum overlap.)

17-2 Josephus permutation
We define the Josephus problem as follows. A group of n people form a
circle, and we are given a positive integer m n. Beginning with a
designated first person, proceed around the circle, removing every mth

person. After each person is removed, counting continues around the
circle that remains. This process continues until nobody remains in the
circle. The order in which the people are removed from the circle defines

the (n, m)-Josephus permutation of the integers 1, 2, ... , n. For example,

the (7, 3)-Josephus permutation is 3, 6, 2, 7, 5, 1, 4.

a. Suppose that m is a constant. Describe an O(n)-time algorithm that,
given an integer n, outputs the (n, m)-Josephus permutation.

b. Suppose that m is not necessarily a constant. Describe an O(n lg n)-
time algorithm that, given integers n and m, outputs the (n, m)-

Josephus permutation.

Chapter notes

In their book, Preparata and Shamos [364] describe several of the
interval trees that appear in the literature, citing work by H.
Edelsbrunner (1980) and E. M. McCreight (1981). The book details an

interval tree that, given a static database of n intervals, allows us to
enumerate all k intervals that overlap a given query interval in O(k + lg
n) time.

18 B-Trees

B-trees are balanced search trees designed to work well on disk drives
or other direct-access secondary storage devices. B-trees are similar to
red-black trees (Chapter 13), but they are better at minimizing the
number of operations that access disks. (We often say just "disk"
instead of "disk drive.") Many database systems use B-trees, or variants
of B-trees, to store information.

B-trees differ from red-black trees in that B-tree nodes may have
many children, from a few to thousands. That is, the "branching factor"
of a B-tree can be quite large, although it usually depends on
characteristics of the disk drive used. B-trees are similar to red-black

trees in that every n-node B-tree has height O(lg n), so that B-trees can
implement many dynamic-set operations in O(lg n) time. But a B-tree

has a larger branching factor than a red-black tree, so the base of the
logarithm that expresses its height is larger, and hence its height can be
considerably lower.

B-trees generalize binary search trees in a natural manner. Figure

18.1 shows a simple B-tree. If an internal B-tree node x contains x.n
keys, then x has x.n + 1 children. The keys in node x serve as dividing
points separating the range of keys handled by x into x.n + 1 subranges,
each handled by one child of x. A search for a key in a B-tree makes an
(x.n + 1)-way decision based on comparisons with the x.n keys stored at
node x. An internal node contains pointers to its children, but a leaf

node does not.
Section 18.1 gives a precise definition of B-trees and proves that the

height of a B-tree grows only logarithmically with the number of nodes

it contains. Section 18.2 describes how to search for a key and insert a
key into a B-tree, and Section 18.3 discusses deletion. Before
proceeding, however, we need to ask why we evaluate data structures
designed to work on a disk drive differently from data structures
designed to work in main random-access memory.

Figure 18.1 A B-tree whose keys are the consonants of English. An internal node x containing
x.n keys has x.n + 1 children. All leaves are at the same depth in the tree. The blue nodes are
examined in a search for the letter R.

Data structures on secondary storage
Computer systems take advantage of various technologies that provide

memory capacity. The main memory of a computer system normally

consists of silicon memory chips. This technology is typically more than
an order of magnitude more expensive per bit stored than magnetic
storage technology, such as tapes or disk drives. Most computer

systems also have secondary storage based on solid-state drives (SSDs)

or magnetic disk drives. The amount of such secondary storage often
exceeds the amount of primary memory by one to two orders of
magnitude. SSDs have faster access times than magnetic disk drives,
which are mechanical devices. In recent years, SSD capacities have
increased while their prices have decreased. Magnetic disk drives
typically have much higher capacities than SSDs, and they remain a
more cost-effective means for storing massive amounts of information.
Disk drives that store several terabytes1 can be found for under $100.

Figure 18.2 shows a typical disk drive. The drive consists of one or

more platters, which rotate at a constant speed around a common
spindle. A magnetizable material covers the surface of each platter. The

drive reads and writes each platter by a head at the end of an arm. The

arms can move their heads toward or away from the spindle. The
surface that passes underneath a given head when it is stationary is

called a track.

Although disk drives are cheaper and have higher capacity than
main memory, they are much, much slower because they have moving
mechanical parts. The mechanical motion has two components: platter
rotation and arm movement. As of this writing, commodity disk drives
rotate at speeds of 540015,000 revolutions per minute (RPM). Typical
speeds are 15,000 RPM in server-grade drives, 7200 RPM in drives for
desktops, and 5400 RPM in drives for laptops. Although 7200 RPM
may seem fast, one rotation takes 8.33 milliseconds, which is over 5
orders of magnitude longer than the 50 nanosecond access times (more
or less) commonly found for main memory. In other words, if a
computer waits a full rotation for a particular item to come under the
read/write head, it could access main memory more than 100,000 times
during that span. The average wait is only half a rotation, but still, the
difference in access times for main memory compared with disk drives
is enormous. Moving the arms also takes some time. As of this writing,
average access times for commodity disk drives are around 4
milliseconds.

Figure 18.2 A typical magnetic disk drive. It consists of one or more platters covered with a
magnetizable material (two platters are shown here) that rotate around a spindle. Each platter
is read and written with a head, shown in red, at the end of an arm. Arms rotate around a
common pivot axis. A track, drawn in blue, is the surface that passes beneath the read/write
head when the head is stationary.

In order to amortize the time spent waiting for mechanical

movements, also known as latency, disk drives access not just one item

but several at a time. Information is divided into a number of equal-

sized blocks of bits that appear consecutively within tracks, and each

disk read or write is of one or more entire blocks.2 Typical disk drives
have block sizes running from 512 to 4096 bytes. Once the read/write
head is positioned correctly and the platter has rotated to the beginning
of the desired block, reading or writing a magnetic disk drive is entirely
electronic (aside from the rotation of the platter), and the disk drive can
quickly read or write large amounts of data.

Often, accessing a block of information and reading it from a disk
drive takes longer than processing all the information read. For this
reason, in this chapter we'll look separately at the two principal
components of the running time:

the number of disk accesses, and

the CPU (computing) time.

We measure the number of disk accesses in terms of the number of
blocks of information that need to be read from or written to the disk

drive. Although disk-access time is not constant--it depends on the
distance between the current track and the desired track and also on
the initial rotational position of the platters--the number of blocks read
or written provides a good first-order approximation of the total time
spent accessing the disk drive.

In a typical B-tree application, the amount of data handled is so
large that all the data do not fit into main memory at once. The B-tree
algorithms copy selected blocks from disk into main memory as needed
and write back onto disk the blocks that have changed. B-tree
algorithms keep only a constant number of blocks in main memory at
any time, and thus the size of main memory does not limit the size of Btrees that can be handled.

B-tree procedures need to be able to read information from disk into
main memory and write information from main memory to disk.

Consider some object x. If x is currently in the computer's main
memory, then the code can refer to the attributes of x as usual: x.key,
for example. If x resides on disk, however, then the procedure must
perform the operation DISK-READ(x) to read the block containing
object x into main memory before it can refer to x's attributes. (Assume
that if x is already in main memory, then DISK-READ(x) requires no

disk accesses: it is a "no-op.") Similarly, procedures call DISK-

WRITE(x) to save any changes that have been made to the attributes of
object x by writing to disk the block containing x. Thus, the typical

pattern for working with an object is as follows:

x = a pointer to some object
DISK-READ(x)
operations that access and/or modify the attributes of x
DISK-WRITE(x) // omitted if no attributes of x were changed
other operations that access but do not modify attributes of x

The system can keep only a limited number of blocks in main memory
at any one time. Our B-tree algorithms assume that the system
automatically flushes from main memory blocks that are no longer in
use.

Since in most systems the running time of a B-tree algorithm
depends primarily on the number of DISK-READ and DISK-WRITE
operations it performs, we typically want each of these operations to
read or write as much information as possible. Thus, a B-tree node is
usually as large as a whole disk block, and this size limits the number of
children a B-tree node can have.

Figure 18.3 A B-tree of height 2 containing over one billion keys. Shown inside each node x is
x.n, the number of keys in x. Each internal node and leaf contains 1000 keys. This B-tree has

1001 nodes at depth 1 and over one million leaves at depth 2.

Large B-trees stored on disk drives often have branching factors
between 50 and 2000, depending on the size of a key relative to the size
of a block. A large branching factor dramatically reduces both the
height of the tree and the number of disk accesses required to find any
key. Figure 18.3 shows a B-tree with a branching factor of 1001 and
height 2 that can store over one billion keys. Nevertheless, if the root
node is kept permanently in main memory, at most two disk accesses
suffice to find any key in this tree.