18.1 Definition of B-trees

To keep things simple, let's assume, as we have for binary search trees
and red-black trees, that any satellite information associated with a key
resides in the same node as the key. In practice, you might actually store
with each key just a pointer to another disk block containing the
satellite information for that key. The pseudocode in this chapter
implicitly assumes that the satellite information associated with a key, or

the pointer to such satellite information, travels with the key whenever
the key is moved from node to node. A common variant on a B-tree,

known as a B+-tree, stores all the satellite information in the leaves and

stores only keys and child pointers in the internal nodes, thus
maximizing the branching factor of the internal nodes.

A B-tree T is a rooted tree with root T.root having the following

properties:

1. Every node x has the following attributes:

a. x.n, the number of keys currently stored in node x,

b. the x.n keys themselves, x.key1, x.key2, ... , x.keyx.n, stored in
monotonically increasing order, so that x.key1 x.key2
x.keyx.n,

c. x.leaf, a boolean value that is TRUE if x is a leaf and FALSE
if x is an internal node.

2. Each internal node x also contains x.n + 1 pointers x.c1, x.c2, ...
, x.cx.n+1 to its children. Leaf nodes have no children, and so
their ci attributes are undefined.

3. The keys x.keyi separate the ranges of keys stored in each
subtree: if ki is any key stored in the subtree with root x.ci, then

k1 x.key1 k2 x.key2 x.keyx.n kx.n+1.

4. All leaves have the same depth, which is the tree's height h.

5. Nodes have lower and upper bounds on the number of keys they

can contain, expressed in terms of a fixed integer t 2 called the
minimum degree of the B-tree:

a. Every node other than the root must have at least t - 1 keys.
Every internal node other than the root thus has at least t

children. If the tree is nonempty, the root must have at least
one key.

b. Every node may contain at most 2t - 1 keys. Therefore, an
internal node may have at most 2t children. We say that a node
is full if it contains exactly 2t - 1 keys.3

The simplest B-tree occurs when t = 2. Every internal node then has
either 2, 3, or 4 children, and it is a 2-3-4 tree. In practice, however,
much larger values of t yield B-trees with smaller height.

The height of a B-tree
The number of disk accesses required for most operations on a B-tree is
proportional to the height of the B-tree. The following theorem bounds
the worst-case height of a B-tree.

Figure 18.4 A B-tree of height 3 containing a minimum possible number of keys. Shown inside

each node x is x.n.

Theorem 18.1
If n 1, then for any n-key B-tree T of height h and minimum degree t

2,

Proof By definition, the root of a nonempty B-tree T contains at least
one key, and all other nodes contain at least t - 1 keys. Let h be the
height of T. Then T contains at least 2 nodes at depth 1, at least 2t

nodes at depth 2, at least 2t2 nodes at depth 3, and so on, until at depth
h, it has at least 2th-1 nodes. Figure 18.4 illustrates such a tree for h =
3. The number n of keys therefore satisfies the inequality

so that th (n + 1)/2. Taking base-t logarithms of both sides proves the

theorem.

You can see the power of B-trees as compared with red-black trees.

Although the height of the tree grows as O(log n) in both cases (recall
that t is a constant), for B-trees the base of the logarithm can be many
times larger. Thus, B-trees save a factor of about lg t over red-black

trees in the number of nodes examined for most tree operations.
Because examining an arbitrary node in a tree usually entails accessing
the disk, B-trees avoid a substantial number of disk accesses.

Exercises

18.1-1
Why isn't a minimum degree of t = 1 allowed?

18.1-2
For what values of t is the tree of Figure 18.1 a legal B-tree?

18.1-3

Show all legal B-trees of minimum degree 2 that store the keys 1, 2, 3, 4,
5.

18.1-4
As a function of the minimum degree t, what is the maximum number
of keys that can be stored in a B-tree of height h?

18.1-5

Describe the data structure that results if each black node in a redblack tree absorbs its red children, incorporating their children with its
own.