18.2 Basic operations on B-trees

This section presents the details of the operations B-TREE-SEARCH,
B-TREE-CREATE, and B-TREE-INSERT. These procedures observe
two conventions:

The root of the B-tree is always in main memory, so that no
procedure ever needs to perform a DISK-READ on the root. If
any changes to the root node occur, however, then DISK-WRITE
must be called on the root.

Any nodes that are passed as parameters must already have had a
DISK-READ operation performed on them.

The procedures are all "one-pass" algorithms that proceed downward
from the root of the tree, without having to back up.

Searching a B-tree

Searching a B-tree is much like searching a binary search tree, except
that instead of making a binary, or "two-way," branching decision at
each node, the search makes a multiway branching decision according
to the number of the node's children. More precisely, at each internal

node x, the search makes an (x.n + 1)-way branching decision.

The procedure B-TREE-SEARCH generalizes the TREE-SEARCH
procedure defined for binary search trees on page 316. It takes as input

a pointer to the root node x of a subtree and a key k to be searched for

in that subtree. The top-level call is thus of the form B-TREE-

SEARCH(T.root, k). If k is in the B-tree, then B-TREE-SEARCH
returns the ordered pair (y, i) consisting of a node y and an index i such
that y.keyi = k. Otherwise, the procedure returns NIL.

B-TREE-SEARCH(x, k)

1i = 1
2 while i x.n and k > x.keyi
3 i=i+1
4 if i x.n and k == x.keyi
5 return (x, i)
6 elseif x.leaf

7 returnNIL

8 else DISK-READ(x.ci)
9 return B-TREE-SEARCH(x.ci, k)

Using a linear-search procedure, lines 13 of B-TREE-SEARCH find

the smallest index i such that k x.keyi, or else they set i to x.n + 1.

Lines 45 check to see whether the search has discovered the key,

returning if it has. Otherwise, if x is a leaf, then line 7 terminates the
search unsuccessfully, and if x is an internal node, lines 89 recurse to
search the appropriate subtree of x, after performing the necessary

DISK-READ on that child. Figure 18.1 illustrates the operation of BTREE-SEARCH. The blue nodes are those examined during a search

for the key R.

As in the TREE-SEARCH procedure for binary search trees, the
nodes encountered during the recursion form a simple path downward
from the root of the tree. The B-TREE-SEARCH procedure therefore

accesses O(h) = O(logt n) disk blocks, where h is the height of the B-tree
and n is the number of keys in the B-tree. Since x.n < 2t, the while loop
of lines 23 takes O(t) time within each node, and the total CPU time is
O(th) = O(t logtn).

Creating an empty B-tree

To build a B-tree T, first use the B-TREE-CREATE procedure on the

next page to create an empty root node and then call the B-TREEINSERT procedure on page 508 to add new keys. Both of these

procedures use an auxiliary procedure ALLOCATE-NODE, whose
pseudocode we omit and which allocates one disk block to be used as a

new node in O(1) time. A node created by ALLOCATE-NODE requires

no DISK-READ, since there is as yet no useful information stored on

the disk for that node. B-TREE-CREATE requires O(1) disk operations
and O(1) CPU time.

B-TREE-CREATE(T)

1 x = ALLOCATE-NODE()
2 x.leaf = TRUE
3 x.n = 0
4 DISK-WRITE(x)
5 T.root = x

Inserting a key into a B-tree

Inserting a key into a B-tree is significantly more complicated than
inserting a key into a binary search tree. As with binary search trees,
you search for the leaf position at which to insert the new key. With a
B-tree, however, you cannot simply create a new leaf node and insert it,
as the resulting tree would fail to be a valid B-tree. Instead, you insert
the new key into an existing leaf node. Since you cannot insert a key

into a leaf node that is full, you need an operation that splits a full node
y (having 2t - 1 keys) around its median key y.keyt into two nodes
having only t - 1 keys each. The median key moves up into y's parent to
identify the dividing point between the two new trees. But if y's parent is

also full, you must split it before you can insert the new key, and thus
you could end up splitting full nodes all the way up the tree.

To avoid having to go back up the tree, just split every full node you
encounter as you go down the tree. In this way, whenever you need to
split a full node, you are assured that its parent is not full. Inserting a
key into a B-tree then requires only a single pass down the tree from the
root to a leaf.

Splitting a node in a B-tree

The procedure B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD on the facing page takes as

input a nonfull internal node x (assumed to reside in main memory) and
an index i such that x.ci (also assumed to reside in main memory) is a
full child of x. The procedure splits this child in two and adjusts x so

that it has an additional child. To split a full root, you first need to make

the root a child of a new empty root node, so that you can use B-TREE-

SPLIT-CHILD. The tree thus grows in height by 1: splitting is the only

means by which the tree grows taller.

B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD(x, i)

1y = x.ci // full node to split

2z = ALLOCATE-NODE() // z will take half of y

3z.leaf = y.leaf // z gets y's greatest keys ...

4z.n = t - 1 // ... and its corresponding children

5for j = 1 to t - 1 // y keeps t - 1 keys

6 z.keyj = y.keyj+t

7if not y.leaf

8 for j = 1 to t

9 z.cj = y.cj+t

10y.n = t - 1

11for j = x.n + 1 downto i + 1 // shift x's children to the right ...
12 x.cj+1 = x.cj
13x.ci+1 = z // ... to make room for z as a child
// shift the corresponding keys in x
14for j = x.ndownto i
15 x.keyj+1 = x.keyj // insert y's median key
16x.keyi = y.keyt // x has gained a child
17x.n = x.n + 1

18 DISK-WRITE(y)
19 DISK-WRITE(z)
20 DISK-WRITE(x)

Figure 18.5 illustrates how a node splits. B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD

splits the full node y = x.ci about its median key (S in the figure), which

moves up into y's parent node x. Those keys in y that are greater than
the median key move into a new node z, which becomes a new child of
x.

B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD works by straightforward cutting and

pasting. Node x is the parent of the node y being split, which is x's ith
child (set in line 1). Node y originally has 2t children and 2t - 1 keys,
but splitting reduces y to t children and t - 1 keys. The t largest children
and t - 1 keys of node y move over to node z, which becomes a new
child of x, positioned just after y in x's table of children. The median
key of y moves up to become the key in node x that separates the
pointers to nodes y and z.

Lines 29 create node z and give it the largest t - 1 keys and, if y and
z are internal nodes, the corresponding t children of y. Line 10 adjusts
the key count for y. Then, lines 1117 shift keys and child pointers in x
to the right in order to make room for x's new child, insert z as a new
child of x, move the median key from y up to x in order to separate y
from z, and adjust x's key count. Lines 1820 write out all modified disk
blocks. The CPU time used by B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD is (t), due to

the for loops in lines 56 and 89. (The for loops in lines 1112 and 14

15 also run for O(t) iterations.) The procedure performs O(1) disk

operations.

Figure 18.5 Splitting a node with t = 4. Node y = x.ci splits into two nodes, y and z, and the
median key S of y moves up into y's parent.

Inserting a key into a B-tree in a single pass down the tree

Inserting a key k into a B-tree T of height h requires just a single pass
down the tree and O(h) disk accesses. The CPU time required is O(th) =
O(t logt n). The B-TREE-INSERT procedure uses B-TREE-SPLIT-

CHILD to guarantee that the recursion never descends to a full node.
If the root is full, B-TREE-INSERT splits it by calling the procedure BTREE-SPLIT-ROOT on the facing page.

B-TREE-INSERT(T, k)

1 r = T.root
2 if r.n == 2t - 1
3 s = B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT(T)
4 B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL(s, k)
5 else B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL(r, k)

B-TREE-INSERT works as follows. If the root is full, then line 3

calls B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT in line 3 to split it. A new node s (with two

children) becomes the root and is returned by B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT.
Splitting the root, illustrated in Figure 18.6, is the only way to increase
the height of a B-tree. Unlike a binary search tree, a B-tree increases in
height at the top instead of at the bottom. Regardless of whether the
root split, B-TREE-INSERT finishes by calling B-TREE-INSERT-

NONFULL to insert key k into the tree rooted at the nonfull root node,

which is either the new root (the call in line 4) or the original root (the
call in line 5).

Figure 18.6 Splitting the root with t = 4. Root node r splits in two, and a new root node s is
created. The new root contains the median key of r and has the two halves of r as children.

The B-tree grows in height by one when the root is split. A B-tree's height increases only when
the root splits.

B-TREE-SPLIT-ROOT(T)

1 s = ALLOCATE-NODE()
2 s.leaf = FALSE
3 s.n = 0
4 s.c1 = T.root
5 T.root = s
6 B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD(s, 1)
7 return s

The auxiliary procedure B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL on page 511

inserts key k into node x, which is assumed to be nonfull when the

procedure is called. B-TREEINSERT-NONFULL recurses as necessary
down the tree, at all times guaranteeing that the node to which it
recurses is not full by calling B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD as necessary. The
operation of B-TREE-INSERT and the recursive operation of BTREE-INSERT-NONFULL guarantee that this assumption is true.

Figure 18.7 illustrates the various cases of how B-TREE-INSERTNONFULL inserts a key into a B-tree. Lines 38 handle the case in

which x is a leaf node by inserting key k into x, shifting to the right all
keys in x that are greater than k. If x is not a leaf node, then k should

go into the appropriate leaf node in the subtree rooted at internal node

x. Lines 911 determine the child x.ci to which the recursion descends.

Line 13 detects whether the recursion would descend to a full child, in

which case line 14 calls B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD to split that child into

two nonfull children, and lines 1516 determine which of the two

children is the correct one to descend to. (Note that DISK-READ(x.ci)
is not needed after line 16 increments i, since the recursion descends in

this case to a child that was just created by B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD.)

The net effect of lines 1316 is thus to guarantee that the procedure

never recurses to a full node. Line 17 then recurses to insert k into the

appropriate subtree.

Figure 18.7 Inserting keys into a B-tree. The minimum degree t for this B-tree is 3, so that a

node can hold at most 5 keys. Blue nodes are modified by the insertion process. (a) The initial

tree for this example. (b) The result of inserting B into the initial tree. This case is a simple
insertion into a leaf node. (c) The result of inserting Q into the previous tree. The node RST U
V splits into two nodes containing RS and U V, the key T moves up to the root, and Q is
inserted in the leftmost of the two halves (the RS node). (d) The result of inserting L into the

previous tree. The root splits right away, since it is full, and the B-tree grows in height by one.

Then L is inserted into the leaf containing JK. (e) The result of inserting F into the previous
tree. The node ABCDE splits before F is inserted into the rightmost of the two halves (the DE

node).

B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL(x, k)

1i = x.n

2if x.leaf // inserting into a leaf ?

3 while i 1 and k < x.keyi // shift keys in x to make room for k

4 x.keyi+1 = x.keyi

5 i=i-1

6 x.keyi+1 = k // insert key k in x

7 x.n = x.n + 1 // now x has 1 more key

8 DISK-WRITE(x)

9else while i 1 and k < x.keyi // find the child where k belongs

10 i=i-1

11 i = i + 1

12 DISK-READ(x.ci)

13 if x.ci.n == 2t - 1 // split the child if it's full

14 B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD(x, i)

15 if k > x.keyi // does k go into x.ci or x.ci+1?

16 i=i+1

17 B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL(x.ci, k)

For a B-tree of height h, B-TREE-INSERT performs O(h) disk
accesses, since only O(1) DISK-READ and DISK-WRITE operations
occur at each level of the tree. The total CPU time used is O(t) in each
level of the tree, or O(th) = O(t logt n) overall. Since B-TREE-INSERT-

NONFULL is tail-recursive, you can instead implement it with a while

loop, thereby demonstrating that the number of blocks that need to be

in main memory at any time is O(1).

Exercises

18.2-1

Show the results of inserting the keys

F, S, Q, K, C, L, H, T, V, W, M, R, N, P, A, B, X, Y, D, Z, E

in order into an empty B-tree with minimum degree 2. Draw only the
configurations of the tree just before some node must split, and also
draw the final configuration.

18.2-2

Explain under what circumstances, if any, redundant DISK-READ or
DISK-WRITE operations occur during the course of executing a call to
B-TREE-INSERT. (A redundant DISK-READ is a DISK-READ for a
block that is already in memory. A redundant DISK-WRITE writes to
disk a block of information that is identical to what is already stored
there.)

18.2-3

Professor Bunyan asserts that the B-TREE-INSERT procedure always
results in a B-tree with the minimum possible height. Show that the

professor is mistaken by proving that with t = 2 and the set of keys {1,

2, ... , 15}, there is no insertion sequence that results in a B-tree with
the minimum possible height.

18.2-4
If you insert the keys {1, 2, ... , n} into an empty B-tree with minimum

degree 2, how many nodes does the final B-tree have?

18.2-5

Since leaf nodes require no pointers to children, they could conceivably

use a different (larger) t value than internal nodes for the same disk

block size. Show how to modify the procedures for creating and
inserting into a B-tree to handle this variation.

18.2-6

Suppose that you implement B-TREE-SEARCH to use binary search
rather than linear search within each node. Show that this change

makes the required CPU time O(lg n), independent of how t might be
chosen as a function of n.

18.2-7

Suppose that disk hardware allows you to choose the size of a disk
block arbitrarily, but that the time it takes to read the disk block is

a+bt, where a and b are specified constants and t is the minimum degree
for a B-tree using blocks of the selected size. Describe how to choose t

so as to minimize (approximately) the B-tree search time. Suggest an

optimal value of t for the case in which a = 5 milliseconds and b = 10

microseconds.