18.3 Deleting a key from a B-tree

Deletion from a B-tree is analogous to insertion but a little more
complicated, because you can delete a key from any node--not just a
leaf--and when you delete a key from an internal node, you must
rearrange the node's children. As in insertion, you must guard against
deletion producing a tree whose structure violates the B-tree properties.
Just as a node should not get too big due to insertion, a node must not
get too small during deletion (except that the root is allowed to have

fewer than the minimum number t - 1 of keys). And just as a simple

insertion algorithm might have to back up if a node on the path to
where the key is to be inserted is full, a simple approach to deletion
might have to back up if a node (other than the root) along the path to
where the key is to be deleted has the minimum number of keys.

The procedure B-TREE-DELETE deletes the key k from the subtree
rooted at x. Unlike the procedures TREE-DELETE on page 325 and

RB-DELETE on page 348, which are given the node to delete--
presumably as the result of a prior search--B-TREE-DELETE

combines the search for key k with the deletion process. Why do we

combine search and deletion in B-TREE-DELETE? Just as B-TREEINSERT prevents any node from becoming overfull (having more than

2t - 1 keys) while making a single pass down the tree, B-TREE-

DELETE prevents any node from becoming underfull (having fewer

than t - 1 keys) while also making a single pass down the tree, searching

for and ultimately deleting the key.
To prevent any node from becoming underfull, the design of B-

TREE-DELETE guarantees that whenever it calls itself recursively on a

node x, the number of keys in x is at least the minimum degree t at the
time of the call. (Although the root may have fewer than t keys and a
recursive call may be made from the root, no recursive call is made on

the root.) This condition requires one more key than the minimum

required by the usual B-tree conditions, and so a key might have to be

moved from x into one of its child nodes (still leaving x with at least the
minimum t - 1 keys) before a recursive call is made on that child, thus

allowing deletion to occur in one downward pass without having to

traverse back up the tree.

We describe how the procedure B-TREE-DELETE(T, k) deletes a
key k from a B-tree T instead of presenting detailed pseudocode. We

examine three cases, illustrated in Figure 18.8. The cases are for when

the search arrives at a leaf, at an internal node containing key k, and at
an internal node not containing key k. As mentioned above, in all three
cases node x has at least t keys (with the possible exception of when x is
the root). Cases 2 and 3--when x is an internal node--guarantee this

property as the recursion descends through the B-tree.

Figure 18.8 Deleting keys from a B-tree. The minimum degree for this B-tree is t = 3, so that,

other than the root, every node must have at least 2 keys. Blue nodes are those that are

modified by the deletion process. (a) The B-tree of Figure 18.7(e). (b) Deletion of F, which is

case 1: simple deletion from a leaf when all nodes visited during the search (other than the

root) have at least t = 3 keys. (c) Deletion of M, which is case 2a: the predecessor L of M
moves up to take M's position. (d) Deletion of G, which is case 2c: push G down to make node
DEGJK and then delete G from this leaf (case 1). (e) Deletion of D, which is case 3b: since the
recursion cannot descend to node CL because it has only 2 keys, push P down and merge it
with CL and TX to form CLP TX. Then delete D from a leaf (case 1). (e0) After (e), delete the
empty root. The tree shrinks in height by 1. (f) Deletion of B, which is case 3a: C moves to fill
B's position and E moves to fill C's position.

Case 1: The search arrives at a leaf node x. If x contains key k, then
delete k from x. If x does not contain key k, then k was not in the B-

tree and nothing else needs to be done.

Case 2: The search arrives at an internal node x that contains key k. Let
k = x.keyi. One of the following three cases applies, depending on the
number of keys in x.ci (the child of x that precedes k) and x.ci+1 (the
child of x that follows k).

Case 2a: x.ci has at least t keys. Find the predecessor k of k in the
subtree rooted at x.ci. Recursively delete k from x.ci, and replace k by
k in x. (Key k can be found and deleted in a single downward pass.)

Case 2b: x.ci has t - 1 keys and x.ci+1has at least t keys. This case is
symmetric to case 2a. Find the successor k of k in the subtree rooted
at x.ci+1. Recursively delete k from x.ci+1, and replace k by k in x.
(Again, finding and deleting k can be done in a single downward

pass.)

Case 2c: Both x.ci and x.ci+1have t - 1 keys. Merge k and all of x.ci+1
into x.ci, so that x loses both k and the pointer to x.ci+1, and x.ci now
contains 2t - 1 keys. Then free x.ci+1 and recursively delete k from
x.ci.

Case 3: The search arrives at an internal node x that does not contain key
k. Continue searching down the tree while ensuring that each node
visited has at least t keys. To do so, determine the root x.ci of the
appropriate subtree that must contain k, if k is in the tree at all. If x.ci
has only t - 1 keys, execute case 3a or 3b as necessary to guarantee
descending to a node containing at least t keys. Then finish by
recursing on the appropriate child of x.

Case 3a: x.ci has only t - 1 keys but has an immediate sibling with at
least t keys. Give x.ci an extra key by moving a key from x down into
x.ci, moving a key from x.ci's immediate left or right sibling up into x,
and moving the appropriate child pointer from the sibling into x.ci.

Case 3b: x.ci and each of x.ci's immediate siblings have t - 1 keys. (It is
possible for x.ci to have either one or two siblings.) Merge x.ci with
one sibling, which involves moving a key from x down into the new

merged node to become the median key for that node.

In cases 2c and 3b, if node x is the root, it could end up having no
keys. When this situation occurs, then x is deleted, and x's only child
x.c1 becomes the new root of the tree. This action decreases the height

of the tree by one and preserves the property that the root of the tree
contains at least one key (unless the tree is empty).

Since most of the keys in a B-tree are in the leaves, deletion
operations often end up deleting keys from leaves. The B-TREEDELETE procedure then acts in one downward pass through the tree,

without having to back up. When deleting a key in an internal node x,

however, the procedure might make a downward pass through the tree

to find the key's predecessor or successor and then return to node x to

replace the key with its predecessor or successor (cases 2a and 2b).

Returning to node x does not require a traversal through all the levels
between x and the node containing the predecessor or successor,
however, since the procedure can just keep a pointer to x and the key
position within x and put the predecessor or successor key directly

there.

Although this procedure seems complicated, it involves only O(h)
disk operations for a B-tree of height h, since only O(1) calls to DISK-

READ and DISK-WRITE are made between recursive invocations of

the procedure. The CPU time required is O(th) = O(t logtn).

Exercises

18.3-1
Show the results of deleting C, P, and V, in order, from the tree of

Figure 18.8(f).

18.3-2

Write pseudocode for B-TREE-DELETE.

Problems

18-1 Stacks on secondary storage

Consider implementing a stack in a computer that has a relatively small
amount of fast primary memory and a relatively large amount of slower
disk storage. The operations PUSH and POP work on single-word

values. The stack can grow to be much larger than can fit in memory,
and thus most of it must be stored on disk.

A simple, but inefficient, stack implementation keeps the entire stack
on disk. Maintain in memory a stack pointer, which is the disk address
of the top element on the stack. Indexing block numbers and word

offsets within blocks from 0, if the pointer has value p, the top element
is the (p mod m)th word on block p/m of the disk, where m is the

number of words per block.
To implement the PUSH operation, increment the stack pointer,

read the appropriate block into memory from disk, copy the element to
be pushed to the appropriate word on the block, and write the block
back to disk. A POP operation is similar. Read in the appropriate block
from disk, save the top of the stack, decrement the stack pointer, and
return the saved value. You need not write back the block, since it was
not modified, and the word in the block that contained the popped
value is ignored.

As in the analyses of B-tree operations, two costs matter: the total
number of disk accesses and the total CPU time. A disk access also

incurs a cost in CPU time. In particular, any disk access to a block of m
words incurs charges of one disk access and (m) CPU time.

a. Asymptotically, what is the worst-case number of disk accesses for n

stack operations using this simple implementation? What is the CPU

time for n stack operations? Express your answer in terms of m and n

for this and subsequent parts.

Now consider a stack implementation in which you keep one block of
the stack in memory. (You also maintain a small amount of memory to
record which block is currently in memory.) You can perform a stack
operation only if the relevant disk block resides in memory. If
necessary, you can write the block currently in memory to the disk and
read the new block from the disk into memory. If the relevant disk
block is already in memory, then no disk accesses are required.

b. What is the worst-case number of disk accesses required for n PUSH

operations? What is the CPU time?

c. What is the worst-case number of disk accesses required for n stack

operations? What is the CPU time?

Suppose that you now implement the stack by keeping two blocks in
memory (in addition to a small number of words for bookkeeping).

d. Describe how to manage the stack blocks so that the amortized
number of disk accesses for any stack operation is O(1/m) and the
amortized CPU time for any stack operation is O(1).

18-2 Joining and splitting 2-3-4 trees

The join operation takes two dynamic sets S and S and an element x
such that x.key < x.key < x.key for any x S and x S. It returns
a set S = S {x} S. The split operation is like an "inverse" join:
given a dynamic set S and an element x S, it creates a set S that
consists of all elements in S - {x} whose keys are less than x.key and
another set S that consists of all elements in S - {x} whose keys are
greater than x.key. This problem investigates how to implement these
operations on 2-3-4 trees (B-trees with t = 2). Assume for convenience

that elements consist only of keys and that all key values are distinct.

a. Show how to maintain, for every node x of a 2-3-4 tree, the height of
the subtree rooted at x as an attribute x.height. Make sure that your

implementation does not affect the asymptotic running times of

searching, insertion, and deletion.

b. Show how to implement the join operation. Given two 2-3-4 trees T
and T and a key k, the join operation should run in O(1 + |h - h|)
time, where h and h are the heights of T and T, respectively.

c. Consider the simple path p from the root of a 2-3-4 tree T to a given

key k, the set S of keys in T that are less than k, and the set S of

keys in T that are greater than k. Show that p breaks S into a set of

trees and a set of keys such that

for i = 1, 2, ... , m and any keys and . What is the

relationship between the heights of and ? Describe how p breaks

S into sets of trees and keys.

d. Show how to implement the split operation on T. Use the join
operation to assemble the keys in S into a single 2-3-4 tree T and the
keys in S into a single 2-3-4 tree T. The running time of the split
operation should be O(lg n), where n is the number of keys in T. (Hint:

The costs for joining should telescope.)

Chapter notes

Knuth [261], Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5], and Sedgewick and Wayne
[402] give further discussions of balanced-tree schemes and B-trees.
Comer [99] provides a comprehensive survey of B-trees. Guibas and
Sedgewick [202] discuss the relationships among various kinds of
balanced-tree schemes, including red-black trees and 2-3-4 trees.

In 1970, J. E. Hopcroft invented 2-3 trees, a precursor to B-trees and
2-3-4 trees, in which every internal node has either two or three
children. Bayer and McCreight [39] introduced B-trees in 1972 with no
explanation of their choice of name.

Bender, Demaine, and Farach-Colton [47] studied how to make Btrees perform well in the presence of memory-hierarchy effects. Their

cache-oblivious algorithms work efficiently without explicitly knowing

the data transfer sizes within the memory hierarchy.

1 When specifying disk capacities, one terabyte is one trillion bytes, rather than 240 bytes.
2 SSDs also exhibit greater latency than main memory and access data in blocks.

3 Another common variant on a B-tree, known as a B*-tree, requires each internal node to be

at least 2/3 full, rather than at least half full, as a B-tree requires.

19 Data Structures for Disjoint Sets

Some applications involve grouping n distinct elements into a collection

of disjoint sets--sets with no elements in common. These applications
often need to perform two operations in particular: finding the unique
set that contains a given element and uniting two sets. This chapter
explores methods for maintaining a data structure that supports these
operations.

Section 19.1 describes the operations supported by a disjoint-set data
structure and presents a simple application. Section 19.2 looks at a
simple linked-list implementation for disjoint sets. Section 19.3 presents a
more efficient representation using rooted trees. The running time using
the tree representation is theoretically superlinear, but for all practical
purposes it is linear. Section 19.4 defines and discusses a very quickly
growing function and its very slowly growing inverse, which appears in
the running time of operations on the tree-based implementation, and
then, by a complex amortized analysis, proves an upper bound on the
running time that is just barely superlinear.