19.2 Linked-list representation of disjoint sets

Figure 19.2(a) shows a simple way to implement a disjoint-set data
structure: each set is represented by its own linked list. The object for

each set has attributes head, pointing to the first object in the list, and
tail, pointing to the last object. Each object in the list contains a set

member, a pointer to the next object in the list, and a pointer back to the
set object. Within each linked list, the objects may appear in any order.
The representative is the set member in the first object in the list.

With this linked-list representation, both MAKE-SET and FIND-

SET require only O(1) time. To carry out MAKE-SET(x), create a new
linked list whose only object is x. For FIND-SET(x), just follow the
pointer from x back to its set object and then return the member in the
object that head points to. For example, in Figure 19.2(a), the call FINDSET(g) returns f.

Figure 19.2 (a) Linked-list representations of two sets. Set S1 contains members d, f, and g,
with representative f, and set S2 contains members b, c, e, and h, with representative c. Each

object in the list contains a set member, a pointer to the next object in the list, and a pointer

back to the set object. Each set object has pointers head and tail to the first and last objects,
respectively. (b) The result of UNION(g, e), which appends the linked list containing e to the
linked list containing g. The representative of the resulting set is f. The set object for e's list, S2,

is destroyed.

A simple implementation of union

The simplest implementation of the UNION operation using the linkedlist set representation takes significantly more time than MAKE-SET or

FIND-SET. As Figure 19.2(b) shows, the operation UNION(x, y)
appends y's list onto the end of x's list. The representative of x's list

becomes the representative of the resulting set. To quickly find where to

append y's list, use the tail pointer for x's list. Because all members of y's
list join x's list, the UNION operation destroys the set object for y's list.

The UNION operation is where this implementation pays the price for
FIND-SET taking constant time: UNION must also update the pointer

to the set object for each object originally on y's list, which takes time
linear in the length of y's list. In Figure 19.2, for example, the operation
UNION(g, e) causes pointers to be updated in the objects for b, c, e, and
h.

In fact, we can construct a sequence of m operations on n objects
that requires (n2) time. Starting with objects x1, x2, ... , xn, execute the
sequence of n MAKE-SET operations followed by n - 1 UNION
operations shown in Figure 19.3, so that m = 2n-1. The n MAKE-SET
operations take (n) time. Because the ith UNION operation updates i
objects, the total number of objects updated by all n-1 UNION

operations forms an arithmetic series:

Figure 19.3 A sequence of 2n - 1 operations on n objects that takes (n2) time, or (n) time

per operation on average, using the linked-list set representation and the simple implementation
of UNION.

The total number of operations is 2n-1, and so each operation on
average requires (n) time. That is, the amortized time of an operation is
(n).

A weighted-union heuristic
In the worst case, the above implementation of UNION requires an

average of (n) time per call, because it might be appending a longer list

onto a shorter list, and the procedure must update the pointer to the set
object for each member of the longer list. Suppose instead that each list
also includes the length of the list (which can be maintained
straightforwardly with constant overhead) and that the UNION

procedure always appends the shorter list onto the longer, breaking ties

arbitrarily. With this simple weighted-union heuristic, a single UNION
operation can still take (n) time if both sets have (n) members. As the
following theorem shows, however, a sequence of m MAKE-SET,
UNION, and FIND-SET operations, n of which are MAKE-SET
operations, takes O(m + n lg n) time.

Theorem 19.1

Using the linked-list representation of disjoint sets and the weighted-

union heuristic, a sequence of m MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET
operations, n of which are MAKE-SET operations, takes O(m + n lg n)

time.

Proof Because each UNION operation unites two disjoint sets, at most
n - 1 UNION operations occur over all. We now bound the total time

taken by these UNION operations. We start by determining, for each

object, an upper bound on the number of times the object's pointer back

to its set object is updated. Consider a particular object x. Each time x's
pointer is updated, x must have started in the smaller set. The first time
x's pointer is updated, therefore, the resulting set must have at least 2
members. Similarly, the next time x's pointer is updated, the resulting set
must have had at least 4 members. Continuing on, for any k n, after x's
pointer has been updated lg k times, the resulting set must have at least
k members. Since the largest set has at most n members, each object's
pointer is updated at most lg n times over all the UNION operations.

Thus the total time spent updating object pointers over all UNION

operations is O(n lg n). We must also account for updating the tail

pointers and the list lengths, which take only (1) time per UNION

operation. The total time spent in all UNION operations is thus O(n lg
n).

The time for the entire sequence of m operations follows. Each
MAKE-SET and FIND-SET operation takes O(1) time, and there are
O(m) of them. The total time for the entire sequence is thus O(m + n lg
n).

Exercises

19.2-1

Write pseudocode for MAKE-SET, FIND-SET, and UNION using the
linked-list representation and the weighted-union heuristic. Make sure
to specify the attributes that you assume for set objects and list objects.

19.2-2

Show the data structure that results and the answers returned by the
FIND-SET operations in the following program. Use the linked-list
representation with the weighted-union heuristic. Assume that if the sets

containing xi and xj have the same size, then the operation UNION(xi,
xj) appends xj's list onto xi's list.

1for i = 1 to 16
2 MAKE-SET(xi)
3for i = 1 to 15 by 2
4 UNION(xi, xi+1)
5for i = 1 to 13 by 4
6 UNION(xi, xi+2)
7UNION(x1, x5)
8UNION(x11, x13)
9UNION(x1, x10)
10FIND-SET(x2)
11FIND-SET(x9)

19.2-3

Adapt the aggregate proof of Theorem 19.1 to obtain amortized time

bounds of O(1) for MAKE-SET and FIND-SET and O(lg n) for

UNION using the linked-list representation and the weighted-union
heuristic.

19.2-4

Give a tight asymptotic bound on the running time of the sequence of
operations in Figure 19.3 assuming the linked-list representation and the

weighted-union heuristic.

19.2-5

Professor Gompers suspects that it might be possible to keep just one

pointer in each set object, rather than two (head and tail), while keeping

the number of pointers in each list element at two. Show that the
professor's suspicion is well founded by describing how to represent each
set by a linked list such that each operation has the same running time as
the operations described in this section. Describe also how the
operations work. Your scheme should allow for the weighted-union

heuristic, with the same effect as described in this section. (Hint: Use the

tail of a linked list as its set's representative.)

19.2-6

Suggest a simple change to the UNION procedure for the linked-list

representation that removes the need to keep the tail pointer to the last

object in each list. Regardless of whether the weighted-union heuristic is
used, your change should not change the asymptotic running time of the

UNION procedure. (Hint: Rather than appending one list to another,

splice them together.)