19.4 Analysis of union by rank with path compression

As noted in Section 19.3, the combined union-by-rank and path-

compression heuristic runs in O(m (n)) time for m disjoint-set
operations on n elements. In this section, we'll explore the function to

see just how slowly it grows. Then we'll analyze the running time using
the potential method of amortized analysis.

A very quickly growing function and its very slowly growing inverse

For integers j, k 0, we define the function Ak(j) as

where the expression uses the functional-iteration notation

defined in equation (3.30) on page 68. Specifically, equation (3.30) gives

and for i 1. We call the parameter

k the level of the function A.

The function Ak(j) strictly increases with both j and k. To see just

how quickly this function grows, we first obtain closed-form expressions

for A1(j) and A2(j).

Lemma 19.2
For any integer j 1, we have A1(j) = 2j + 1.

Proof We first use induction on i to show that . For the

base case, . For the inductive step, assume that

. Then .
Finally, we note that
.

Lemma 19.3
For any integer j 1, we have A2 (j) = 2j+1(j + 1) - 1.

Proof We first use induction on i to show that .

For the base case, we have . For the inductive

step, assume that . Then

. Finally, we note that .

Now we can see how quickly Ak(j) grows by simply examining Ak(1)
for levels k = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. From the definition of A0(j) and the above
lemmas, we have A0(1) = 1 + 1 = 2, A1(1) = 2 · 1 + 1 = 3, and A2(1) =

21+1 · (1 + 1) - 1 = 7. We also have

A3(1) =
= A2(A2(1))
= A2(7)

= 28 · 8 - 1
= 211 - 1
= 2047

and

A4(1) =
= A3(A3(1))
= A3(2047)

=

A2(2047)

= 22048 · 2048 - 1
= 22059 - 1
> 22056
= (24)514
= 16514
1080,
which is the estimated number of atoms in the observable universe. (The
symbol "" denotes the "much-greater-than" relation.)

We define the inverse of the function Ak(n), for integer n 0, by

In words, (n) is the lowest level k for which Ak(1) is at least n. From the
above values of Ak(1), we see that

It is only for values of n so large that the term "astronomical"
understates them (greater than A4(1), a huge number) that (n) > 4, and
so (n) 4 for all practical purposes.

Properties of ranks

In the remainder of this section, we prove an O(m(n)) bound on the

running time of the disjoint-set operations with union by rank and path
compression. In order to prove this bound, we first prove some simple
properties of ranks.

Lemma 19.4

For all nodes x, we have x.rank x.p.rank, with strict inequality if x x.p
(x is not a root). The value of x.rank is initially 0, increases through time
until x x.p, and from then on, x.rank does not change. The value of
x.p.rank monotonically increases over time.

Proof The proof is a straightforward induction on the number of

operations, using the implementations of MAKE-SET, UNION, and
FIND-SET that appear on page 530, and is left as Exercise 19.4-1.

Corollary 19.5

On the simple path from any node going up toward a root, node ranks
strictly increase.

Lemma 19.6
Every node has rank at most n - 1.

Proof Each node's rank starts at 0, and it increases only upon LINK
operations. Because there are at most n - 1 UNION operations, there
are also at most n - 1 LINK operations. Because each LINK operation

either leaves all ranks alone or increases some node's rank by 1, all ranks

are at most n - 1.

Lemma 19.6 provides a weak bound on ranks. In fact, every node has

rank at most lg n (see Exercise 19.4-2). The looser bound of Lemma

19.6 suffices for our purposes, however.

Proving the time bound

In order to prove the O(m(n)) time bound, we'll use the potential

method of amortized analysis from Section 16.3. In performing the
amortized analysis, it will be convenient to assume that we invoke the
LINK operation rather than the UNION operation. That is, since the
parameters of the LINK procedure are pointers to two roots, we act as
though we perform the appropriate FIND-SET operations separately.
The following lemma shows that even if we count the extra FIND-SET

operations induced by UNION calls, the asymptotic running time
remains unchanged.

Lemma 19.7
Suppose that we convert a sequence S of m MAKE-SET, UNION, and
FIND-SET operations into a sequence S of m MAKE-SET, LINK, and

FIND-SET operations by turning each UNION into two FIND-SET

operations followed by one LINK. Then, if sequence S runs in O(m(n))
time, sequence S runs in O(m (n)) time.

Proof Since each UNION operation in sequence S is converted into
three operations in S, we have m m 3m, so that m = (m), Thus, an
O(m (n)) time bound for the converted sequence S implies an O(m
(n)) time bound for the original sequence S.

From now on, we assume that the initial sequence of m MAKE-SET,

UNION, and FIND-SET operations has been converted to a sequence

of m MAKE-SET, LINK, and FIND-SET operations. We now prove an
O(m (n)) time bound for the converted sequence and appeal to Lemma
19.7 to prove the O(m (n)) running time of the original sequence of m

operations.

Potential function

The potential function we use assigns a potential q(x) to each node x in
the disjoint-set forest after q operations. For the potential q of the
entire forest after q operations, sum the individual node potentials:

. Because the forest is empty before the first operation, the

sum is taken over an empty set, and so 0 = 0. No potential q is ever

negative.

The value of q(x) depends on whether x is a tree root after the qth
operation. If it is, or if x.rank = 0, then q(x) = (n) · x.rank.

Now suppose that after the qth operation, x is not a root and that
x.rank 1. We need to define two auxiliary functions on x before we can
define q(x). First we define

That is, level(x) is the greatest level k for which Ak, applied to x's rank, is
no greater than x's parent's rank.

We claim that

which we see as follows. We have

x.p.rank x.rank + 1 (by Lemma 19.4 because x is not a root)
= A0(x.rank) (by the definition (19.1) of A0(j)),

which implies that level(x) 0, and

A(n)(x.rank) A(n)(1) (because Ak(j) is strictly increasing)

n (by the definition (19.2) of (n))

> x.p.rank (by Lemma 19.6),

which implies that level(x) < (n).
For a given nonroot node x, the value of level(x) monotonically

increases over time. Why? Because x is not a root, its rank does not
change. The rank of x.p monotonically increases over time, since if x.p is
not a root then its rank does not change, and if x.p is a root then its rank
can never decrease. Thus, the difference between x.rank and x.p.rank
monotonically increases over time. Therefore, the value of k needed for
Ak(x.rank) to overtake x.p.rank monotonically increases over time as

well.

The second auxiliary function applies when x.rank 1: iter(x) = max

That is, iter(x) is the largest number of times we can iteratively apply
Alevel(x), applied initially to x's rank, before exceeding x's parent's rank.

We claim that when x.rank 1, we have

which we see as follows. We have

x.p.rank Alevel(x)(x.rank) (by the definition (19.3) of level(x))

= (by the definition (3.30) of functional

iteration),

which implies that iter(x) 1. We also have

= Alevel(x)+1(x.rank) (by the definition (19.1) of Ak(j))

> x.p.rank (by the definition (19.3) of

level(x)),

which implies that iter(x) x.rank. Note that because x.p.rank
monotonically increases over time, in order for iter(x) to decrease,
level(x) must increase. As long as level(x) remains unchanged, iter(x)

must either increase or remain unchanged.

With these auxiliary functions in place, we are ready to define the

potential of node x after q operations:

We next investigate some useful properties of node potentials.

Lemma 19.8
For every node x, and for all operation counts q, we have

0 q(x) (n) · x.rank.

Proof If x is a root or x.rank = 0, then q(x) = (n) · x.rank by
definition. Now suppose that x is not a root and that x.rank 1. We can
obtain a lower bound on q(x) by maximizing level(x) and iter(x). The
bounds (19.4) and (19.6) give (n) - level(x) 1 and iter(x) x.rank.

Thus, we have

q(x) = ((n) - level(x)) · x.rank - iter(x)
x.rank - x.rank

= 0.

Similarly, minimizing level(x) and iter(x) provides an upper bound on
q(x). By the bound (19.4), level(x) 0, and by the bound (19.6), iter(x)

1. Thus, we have

q(x) ((n) - 0) · x.rank - 1
= (n) · x.rank - 1
< (n) · x.rank.

Corollary 19.9
If node x is not a root and x.rank > 0, then q(x) < (n) · x.rank.

Potential changes and amortized costs of operations

We are now ready to examine how the disjoint-set operations affect node
potentials. Once we understand how each operation can change the
potential, we can determine the amortized costs.

Lemma 19.10
Let x be a node that is not a root, and suppose that the qth operation is
either a LINK or a FIND-SET. Then after the qth operation, q(x)
q-1(x). Moreover, if x.rank 1 and either level(x) or iter(x) changes
due to the qth operation, then q(x) q-1(x) - 1. That is, x's potential
cannot increase, and if it has positive rank and either level(x) or iter(x)
changes, then x's potential drops by at least 1.

Proof Because x is not a root, the qth operation does not change
x.rank, and because n does not change after the initial n MAKE-SET
operations, (n) remains unchanged as well. Hence, these components of
the formula for x's potential remain the same after the qth operation. If
x.rank = 0, then q(x) = q-1(x) = 0.

Now assume that x.rank 1. Recall that level(x) monotonically
increases over time. If the qth operation leaves level(x) unchanged, then
iter(x) either increases or remains unchanged. If both level(x) and
iter(x) are unchanged, then q(x) = q-1(x). If level(x) is unchanged

and iter(x) increases, then it increases by at least 1, and so q(x)
q-1(x) - 1.

Finally, if the qth operation increases level(x), it increases by at least
1, so that the value of the term ((n) - level(x)) · x.rank drops by at least
x.rank. Because level(x) increased, the value of iter(x) might drop, but
according to the bound (19.6), the drop is by at most x.rank - 1. Thus,
the increase in potential due to the change in iter(x) is less than the
decrease in potential due to the change in level(x), yielding q(x)
q-1(x) - 1.

Our final three lemmas show that the amortized cost of each MAKE-

SET, LINK, and FIND-SET operation is O((n)). Recall from equation

(16.2) on page 456 that the amortized cost of each operation is its actual
cost plus the change in potential due to the operation.

Lemma 19.11
The amortized cost of each MAKE-SET operation is O(1).

Proof Suppose that the qth operation is MAKE-SET(x). This operation
creates node x with rank 0, so that q(x) = 0. No other ranks or
potentials change, and so q = q-1. Noting that the actual cost of the
MAKE-SET operation is O(1) completes the proof.

Lemma 19.12
The amortized cost of each LINK operation is O((n)).

Proof Suppose that the qth operation is LINK(x, y). The actual cost of
the LINK operation is O(1). Without loss of generality, suppose that the
LINK makes y the parent of x.

To determine the change in potential due to the LINK, note that the

only nodes whose potentials may change are x, y, and the children of y

just prior to the operation. We'll show that the only node whose

potential can increase due to the LINK is y, and that its increase is at
most (n):

By Lemma 19.10, any node that is y's child just before the LINK

cannot have its potential increase due to the LINK.

From the definition (19.7) of q(x), note that, since x was a root
just before the qth operation, q-1(x) = (n) · x.rank at that time.
If x.rank = 0, then q(x) = q-1(x) = 0. Otherwise,

q(x) < (n) · x.rank (by Corollary 19.9)
= q-1(x),

and so x's potential decreases.

Because y is a root prior to the LINK, q-1(y) = (n) · y.rank.
After the LINK operation, y remains a root, so that y's potential
still equals (n) times its rank after the operation. The LINK
operation either leaves y's rank alone or increases y's rank by 1.
Therefore, either q(y) = q-1(y) or q(y) = q-1(y) + (n).

The increase in potential due to the LINK operation, therefore, is at

most (n). The amortized cost of the LINK operation is O(1) + (n) =
O((n)).

Lemma 19.13
The amortized cost of each FIND-SET operation is O((n)).

Proof Suppose that the qth operation is a FIND-SET and that the find
path contains s nodes. The actual cost of the FIND-SET operation is
O(s). We will show that no node's potential increases due to the FINDSET and that at least max {0, s - ((n) + 2)} nodes on the find path have

their potential decrease by at least 1.
We first show that no node's potential increases. Lemma 19.10 takes

care of all nodes other than the root. If x is the root, then its potential is
(n) · x.rank, which does not change due to the FIND-SET operation.

Now we show that at least max {0, s - ((n) + 2)} nodes have their
potential decrease by at least 1. Let x be a node on the find path such
that x.rank > 0 and x is followed somewhere on the find path by another

node y that is not a root, where level(y) = level(x) just before the FINDSET operation. (Node y need not immediately follow x on the find path.)
All but at most (n) + 2 nodes on the find path satisfy these constraints
on x. Those that do not satisfy them are the first node on the find path

(if it has rank 0), the last node on the path (i.e., the root), and the last

node w on the path for which level(w) = k, for each k = 0, 1, 2, ... , (n)

-1.

Consider such a node x. It has positive rank and is followed
somewhere on the find path by nonroot node y such that level(y) =
level(x) before the path compression occurs. We claim that the path
compression decreases x's potential by at least 1. To prove this claim, let
k = level(x) = level(y) and i = iter(x) before the path compression occurs.

Just prior to the path compression caused by the FIND-SET, we have

x.p.rank (by the definition (19.5) of iter(x)),

y.p.rank Ak(y.rank) (by the definition (19.3) of level(y)),
y.rank x.p.rank (by Corollary 19.5 and because y follows x on the

find path).

Putting these inequalities together gives

y.p.rank Ak(y.rank)
Ak(x.p.rank) (because Ak(j) is strictly increasing)

= (by the definition (3.30) of functional iteration).

Because path compression makes x and y have the same parent, after
path compression we have x.p.rank = y.p.rank. The parent of y might
change due to the path compression, but if it does, the rank of y's new
parent compared with the rank of y's parent before path compression is
either the same or greater. Since x.rank does not change,

after path compression. By the

definition (19.5) of the iter function, the value of iter(x) increases from i
to at least i + 1. By Lemma 19.10, q(x) q-1(x) - 1, so that x's

potential decreases by at least 1.

The amortized cost of the FIND-SET operation is the actual cost

plus the change in potential. The actual cost is O(s), and we have shown
that the total potential decreases by at least max {0, s - ((n) + 2)}. The
amortized cost, therefore, is at most O(s) - (s - ((n) + 2)) = O(s) - s +
O((n)) = O((n)), since we can scale up the units of potential to
dominate the constant hidden in O(s). (See Exercise 19.4-6.)

Putting the preceding lemmas together yields the following theorem.

Theorem 19.14
A sequence of m MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET operations, n of

which are MAKE-SET operations, can be performed on a disjoint-set

forest with union by rank and path compression in O(m (n)) time.

Proof Immediate from Lemmas 19.7, 19.11, 19.12, and 19.13.

Exercises

19.4-1

Prove Lemma 19.4.

19.4-2
Prove that every node has rank at most lg n.

19.4-3
In light of Exercise 19.4-2, how many bits are necessary to store x.rank
for each node x?

19.4-4

Using Exercise 19.4-2, give a simple proof that operations on a disjoint-

set forest with union by rank but without path compression run in O(m
lg n) time.

19.4-5

Professor Dante reasons that because node ranks increase strictly along
a simple path to the root, node levels must monotonically increase along

the path. In other words, if x.rank > 0 and x.p is not a root, then level(x)
level(x.p). Is the professor correct?

19.4-6

The proof of Lemma 19.13 ends with scaling the units of potential to

dominate the constant hidden in the O(s) term. To be more precise in the

proof, you need to change the definition (19.7) of the potential function

to multiply each of the two cases by a constant, say c, that dominates the
constant in the O(s) term. How must the rest of the analysis change to

accommodate this updated potential function?

19.4-7
Consider the function (n) = min {k : Ak(1) lg(n + 1)}. Show that (n)
3 for all practical values of n and, using Exercise 19.4-2, show how to

modify the potential-function argument to prove that performing a

sequence of m MAKE-SET, UNION, and FIND-SET operations, n of

which are MAKE-SET operations, on a disjoint-set forest with union by

rank and path compression takes O(m(n)) time.

Problems

19-1 Offline minimum
In the offline minimum problem, you maintain a dynamic set T of
elements from the domain {1, 2, ... , n} under the operations INSERT
and EXTRACT-MIN. The input is a sequence S of n INSERT and m
EXTRACT-MIN calls, where each key in {1, 2, ... , n} is inserted exactly

once. Your goal is to determine which key is returned by each

EXTRACT-MIN call. Specifically, you must fill in an array extracted[1:
m], where for i = 1, 2, ... , m, extracted[i] is the key returned by the ith

EXTRACT-MIN call. The problem is "offline" in the sense that you are

allowed to process the entire sequence S before determining any of the

returned keys.

a. Consider the following instance of the offline minimum problem, in
which each operation INSERT(i) is represented by the value of i and

each EXTRACT-MIN is represented by the letter E:

4, 8, E, 3, E, 9, 2, 6, E, E, E, 1, 7, E, 5.

Fill in the correct values in the extracted array.

To develop an algorithm for this problem, break the sequence S into
homogeneous subsequences. That is, represent S by

I1, E, I2, E, I3, ... , Im, E, Im+1,

where each E represents a single EXTRACT-MIN call and each Ij

represents a (possibly empty) sequence of INSERT calls. For each

subsequence Ij, initially place the keys inserted by these operations into
a set Kj, which is empty if Ij is empty. Then execute the OFFLINE-

MINIMUM procedure.

OFFLINE-MINIMUM(m, n)

1 for i = 1 to n

2 determine j such that i Kj

3 if j m + 1

4 extracted[j] = i

5 let l be the smallest value greater than j for which set Kl exists

6 Kl = Kj Kl, destroying Kj

7 return extracted

b. Argue that the array extracted returned by OFFLINE-MINIMUM is

correct.

c. Describe how to implement OFFLINE-MINIMUM efficiently with a

disjoint-set data structure. Give as tight a bound as you can on the
worst-case running time of your implementation.

19-2 Depth determination
In the depth-determination problem, you maintain a forest = {Ti} of

rooted trees under three operations:

MAKE-TREE(v) creates a tree whose only node is v.

FIND-DEPTH(v) returns the depth of node v within its tree.

GRAFT(r, v) makes node r, which is assumed to be the root of a tree,
become the child of node v, which is assumed to be in a different tree
from r but may or may not itself be a root.

a. Suppose that you use a tree representation similar to a disjoint-set
forest: v.p is the parent of node v, except that v.p = v if v is a root.
Suppose further that you implement GRAFT(r, v) by setting r.p = v
and FIND-DEPTH(v) by following the find path from v up to the root,
returning a count of all nodes other than v encountered. Show that the
worst-case running time of a sequence of m MAKE-TREE, FIND-
DEPTH, and GRAFT operations is (m2).

By using the union-by-rank and path-compression heuristics, you can

reduce the worst-case running time. Use the disjoint-set forest S = {Si},
where each set Si (which is itself a tree) corresponds to a tree Ti in the
forest . The tree structure within a set Si, however, does not necessarily
correspond to that of Ti. In fact, the implementation of Si does not

record the exact parent-child relationships but nevertheless allows you

to determine any node's depth in Ti.
The key idea is to maintain in each node v a "pseudodistance" v.d,

which is defined so that the sum of the pseudodistances along the simple

path from v to the root of its set Si equals the depth of v in Ti. That is, if
the simple path from v to its root in Si is v0, v1, ... , vk, where v0 = v and

vk is Si's root, then the depth of v in Ti is .

b. Give an implementation of MAKE-TREE.

c. Show how to modify FIND-SET to implement FIND-DEPTH. Your

implementation should perform path compression, and its running
time should be linear in the length of the find path. Make sure that
your implementation updates pseudodistances correctly.

d. Show how to implement GRAFT(r, v), which combines the sets
containing r and v, by modifying the UNION and LINK procedures.

Make sure that your implementation updates pseudodistances

correctly. Note that the root of a set Si is not necessarily the root of
the corresponding tree Ti.

e. Give a tight bound on the worst-case running time of a sequence of m
MAKE-TREE, FIND-DEPTH, and GRAFT operations, n of which

are MAKE-TREE operations.

19-3 Tarjan's offline lowest-common-ancestors algorithm

The lowest common ancestor of two nodes u and v in a rooted tree T is
the node w that is an ancestor of both u and v and that has the greatest
depth in T. In the offline lowest-common-ancestors problem, you are
given a rooted tree T and an arbitrary set P = {{u, v}} of unordered
pairs of nodes in T, and you wish to determine the lowest common
ancestor of each pair in P.

To solve the offline lowest-common-ancestors problem, the LCA

procedure on the following page performs a tree walk of T with the
initial call LCA(T.root). Assume that each node is colored WHITE prior

to the walk.

a. Argue that line 10 executes exactly once for each pair {u, v} P.

b. Argue that at the time of the call LCA(u), the number of sets in the
disjoint-set data structure equals the depth of u in T.

LCA(u)

1 MAKE-SET(u)
2 FIND-SET(u).ancestor = u

3 for each child v of u in T
4 LCA(v)
5 UNION(u, v)
6 FIND-SET(u).ancestor = u
7 u.color = BLACK

8 for each node v such that {u, v} P

9 if v.color == BLACK

10 print "The lowest common ancestor of "

u "and" v "is" FIND-SET(v).ancestor

c. Prove that LCA correctly prints the lowest common ancestor of u and
v for each pair {u, v} P.

d. Analyze the running time of LCA, assuming that you use the

implementation of the disjoint-set data structure in Section 19.3.

Chapter notes

Many of the important results for disjoint-set data structures are due at

least in part to R. E. Tarjan. Using aggregate analysis, Tarjan [427, 429]

gave the first tight upper bound in terms of the very slowly growing

inverse of Ackermann's function. (The function Ak(j) given in

Section 19.4 is similar to Ackermann's function, and the function (n) is

similar to . Both (n) and are at most 4 for all conceivable

values of m and n.) An upper bound of O(m lg* n) was proven earlier by

Hopcroft and Ullman [5, 227]. The treatment in Section 19.4 is adapted

from a later analysis by Tarjan [431], which is based on an analysis by

Kozen [270]. Harfst and Reingold [209] give a potential-based version of

Tarjan's earlier bound.

Tarjan and van Leeuwen [432] discuss variants on the path-

compression heuristic, including "one-pass methods," which sometimes

offer better constant factors in their performance than do two-pass

methods. As with Tarjan's earlier analyses of the basic path-compression

heuristic, the analyses by Tarjan and van Leeuwen are aggregate. Harfst

and Reingold [209] later showed how to make a small change to the

potential function to adapt their path-compression analysis to these

one-pass variants. Goel et al. [182] prove that linking disjoint-set trees

randomly yields the same asymptotic running time as union by rank.

Gabow and Tarjan [166] show that in certain applications, the disjoint-set

operations can be made to run in O(m) time.

Tarjan [428] showed that a lower bound of time is

required for operations on any disjoint-set data structure satisfying

certain technical conditions. This lower bound was later generalized by

Fredman and Saks [155], who showed that in the worst case,

(lg n)-bit words of memory must be accessed.

Part VI Graph Algorithms

Introduction

Graph problems pervade computer science, and algorithms for working
with them are fundamental to the field. Hundreds of interesting
computational problems are couched in terms of graphs. This part
touches on a few of the more significant ones.

Chapter 20 shows how to represent a graph in a computer and then
discusses algorithms based on searching a graph using either breadthfirst search or depth-first search. The chapter gives two applications of
depth-first search: topologically sorting a directed acyclic graph and
decomposing a directed graph into its strongly connected components.

Chapter 21 describes how to compute a minimum-weight spanning
tree of a graph: the least-weight way of connecting all of the vertices
together when each edge has an associated weight. The algorithms for
computing minimum spanning trees serve as good examples of greedy
algorithms (see Chapter 15).

Chapters 22 and 23 consider how to compute shortest paths between
vertices when each edge has an associated length or "weight." Chapter
22 shows how to find shortest paths from a given source vertex to all
other vertices, and Chapter 23 examines methods to compute shortest
paths between every pair of vertices.

Chapter 24 shows how to compute a maximum flow of material in a
flow network, which is a directed graph having a specified source vertex
of material, a specified sink vertex, and specified capacities for the
amount of material that can traverse each directed edge. This general

problem arises in many forms, and a good algorithm for computing

maximum flows can help solve a variety of related problems efficiently.

Finally, Chapter 25 explores matchings in bipartite graphs: methods

for pairing up vertices that are partitioned into two sets by selecting

edges that go between the sets. Bipartite-matching problems model

several situations that arise in the real world. The chapter examines how

to find a matching of maximum cardinality; the "stable-marriage

problem," which has the highly practical application of matching

medical residents to hospitals; and assignment problems, which

maximize the total weight of a bipartite matching.

When we characterize the running time of a graph algorithm on a

given graph G = (V, E), we usually measure the size of the input in
terms of the number of vertices |V| and the number of edges |E| of the

graph. That is, we denote the size of the input with two parameters, not

just one. We adopt a common notational convention for these

parameters. Inside asymptotic notation (such as O-notation or -
notation), and only inside such notation, the symbol V denotes |V | and
the symbol E denotes |E|. For example, we might say, "the algorithm
runs in O(VE) time," meaning that the algorithm runs in O(|V| |E|) time.

This convention makes the running-time formulas easier to read,

without risk of ambiguity.

Another convention we adopt appears in pseudocode. We denote the

vertex set of a graph G by G.V and its edge set by G.E. That is, the

pseudocode views vertex and edge sets as attributes of a graph.

20 Elementary Graph Algorithms

This chapter presents methods for representing a graph and for
searching a graph. Searching a graph means systematically following
the edges of the graph so as to visit the vertices of the graph. A graphsearching algorithm can discover much about the structure of a graph.
Many algorithms begin by searching their input graph to obtain this
structural information. Several other graph algorithms elaborate on
basic graph searching. Techniques for searching a graph lie at the heart
of the field of graph algorithms.

Section 20.1 discusses the two most common computational
representations of graphs: as adjacency lists and as adjacency matrices.
Section 20.2 presents a simple graph-searching algorithm called
breadth-first search and shows how to create a breadth-first tree.
Section 20.3 presents depth-first search and proves some standard
results about the order in which depth-first search visits vertices.
Section 20.4 provides our first real application of depth-first search:
topologically sorting a directed acyclic graph. A second application of
depth-first search, finding the strongly connected components of a
directed graph, is the topic of Section 20.5.