1.2 Algorithms as a technology

If computers were infinitely fast and computer memory were free,
would you have any reason to study algorithms? The answer is yes, if for
no other reason than that you would still like to be certain that your
solution method terminates and does so with the correct answer.

If computers were infinitely fast, any correct method for solving a
problem would do. You would probably want your implementation to be
within the bounds of good software engineering practice (for example,
your implementation should be well designed and documented), but you
would most often use whichever method was the easiest to implement.

Of course, computers may be fast, but they are not infinitely fast.
Computing time is therefore a bounded resource, which makes it
precious. Although the saying goes, "Time is money," time is even more
valuable than money: you can get back money after you spend it, but
once time is spent, you can never get it back. Memory may be
inexpensive, but it is neither infinite nor free. You should choose
algorithms that use the resources of time and space efficiently.

Efficiency

Different algorithms devised to solve the same problem often differ
dramatically in their efficiency. These differences can be much more
significant than differences due to hardware and software.

As an example, Chapter 2 introduces two algorithms for sorting. The

first, known as insertion sort, takes time roughly equal to c1n2 to sort n
items, where c1 is a constant that does not depend on n. That is, it takes
time roughly proportional to n2. The second, merge sort, takes time
roughly equal to c2n lg n, where lg n stands for log2 n and c2 is another
constant that also does not depend on n. Insertion sort typically has a
smaller constant factor than merge sort, so that c1 < c2. We'll see that

the constant factors can have far less of an impact on the running time

than the dependence on the input size n. Let's write insertion sort's
running time as c1n · n and merge sort's running time as c2n · lg n. Then
we see that where insertion sort has a factor of n in its running time,

merge sort has a factor of lg n, which is much smaller. For example,
when n is 1000, lg n is approximately 10, and when n is 1,000,000, lg n is

approximately only 20. Although insertion sort usually runs faster than

merge sort for small input sizes, once the input size n becomes large
enough, merge sort's advantage of lg n versus n more than compensates
for the difference in constant factors. No matter how much smaller c1 is
than c2, there is always a crossover point beyond which merge sort is

faster.
For a concrete example, let us pit a faster computer (computer A)

running insertion sort against a slower computer (computer B) running
merge sort. They each must sort an array of 10 million numbers.
(Although 10 million numbers might seem like a lot, if the numbers are
eight-byte integers, then the input occupies about 80 megabytes, which
fits in the memory of even an inexpensive laptop computer many times
over.) Suppose that computer A executes 10 billion instructions per
second (faster than any single sequential computer at the time of this
writing) and computer B executes only 10 million instructions per
second (much slower than most contemporary computers), so that
computer A is 1000 times faster than computer B in raw computing
power. To make the difference even more dramatic, suppose that the
world's craftiest programmer codes insertion sort in machine language

for computer A, and the resulting code requires 2n2 instructions to sort
n numbers. Suppose further that just an average programmer

implements merge sort, using a high-level language with an inefficient

compiler, with the resulting code taking 50 n lg n instructions. To sort 10

million numbers, computer A takes

while computer B takes

By using an algorithm whose running time grows more slowly, even with
a poor compiler, computer B runs more than 17 times faster than

computer A! The advantage of merge sort is even more pronounced
when sorting 100 million numbers: where insertion sort takes more than
23 days, merge sort takes under four hours. Although 100 million might
seem like a large number, there are more than 100 million web searches
every half hour, more than 100 million emails sent every minute, and
some of the smallest galaxies (known as ultra-compact dwarf galaxies)
contain about 100 million stars. In general, as the problem size
increases, so does the relative advantage of merge sort.

Algorithms and other technologies

The example above shows that you should consider algorithms, like

computer hardware, as a technology. Total system performance depends

on choosing efficient algorithms as much as on choosing fast hardware.
Just as rapid advances are being made in other computer technologies,
they are being made in algorithms as well.

You might wonder whether algorithms are truly that important on
contemporary computers in light of other advanced technologies, such
as

advanced computer architectures and fabrication technologies,

easy-to-use, intuitive, graphical user interfaces (GUIs),

object-oriented systems,

integrated web technologies,

fast networking, both wired and wireless,

machine learning,

and mobile devices.

The answer is yes. Although some applications do not explicitly require
algorithmic content at the application level (such as some simple, webbased applications), many do. For example, consider a web-based
service that determines how to travel from one location to another. Its
implementation would rely on fast hardware, a graphical user interface,
wide-area networking, and also possibly on object orientation. It would
also require algorithms for operations such as finding routes (probably

using a shortest-path algorithm), rendering maps, and interpolating
addresses.

Moreover, even an application that does not require algorithmic
content at the application level relies heavily upon algorithms. Does the
application rely on fast hardware? The hardware design used
algorithms. Does the application rely on graphical user interfaces? The
design of any GUI relies on algorithms. Does the application rely on
networking? Routing in networks relies heavily on algorithms. Was the
application written in a language other than machine code? Then it was
processed by a compiler, interpreter, or assembler, all of which make
extensive use of algorithms. Algorithms are at the core of most
technologies used in contemporary computers.

Machine learning can be thought of as a method for performing
algorithmic tasks without explicitly designing an algorithm, but instead
inferring patterns from data and thereby automatically learning a
solution. At first glance, machine learning, which automates the process
of algorithmic design, may seem to make learning about algorithms
obsolete. The opposite is true, however. Machine learning is itself a
collection of algorithms, just under a different name. Furthermore, it
currently seems that the successes of machine learning are mainly for
problems for which we, as humans, do not really understand what the
right algorithm is. Prominent examples include computer vision and
automatic language translation. For algorithmic problems that humans
understand well, such as most of the problems in this book, efficient
algorithms designed to solve a specific problem are typically more
successful than machine-learning approaches.

Data science is an interdisciplinary field with the goal of extracting
knowledge and insights from structured and unstructured data. Data
science uses methods from statistics, computer science, and
optimization. The design and analysis of algorithms is fundamental to
the field. The core techniques of data science, which overlap
significantly with those in machine learning, include many of the
algorithms in this book.

Furthermore, with the ever-increasing capacities of computers, we
use them to solve larger problems than ever before. As we saw in the
above comparison between insertion sort and merge sort, it is at larger

problem sizes that the differences in efficiency between algorithms
become particularly prominent.

Having a solid base of algorithmic knowledge and technique is one
characteristic that defines the truly skilled programmer. With modern
computing technology, you can accomplish some tasks without knowing
much about algorithms, but with a good background in algorithms, you
can do much, much more.

Exercises

1.2-1

Give an example of an application that requires algorithmic content at
the application level, and discuss the function of the algorithms
involved.

1.2-2
Suppose that for inputs of size n on a particular computer, insertion
sort runs in 8n2 steps and merge sort runs in 64 n lg n steps. For which
values of n does insertion sort beat merge sort?

1.2-3
What is the smallest value of n such that an algorithm whose running
time is 100n2 runs faster than an algorithm whose running time is 2n on

the same machine?

Problems

1-1 Comparison of running times
For each function f (n) and time t in the following table, determine the
largest size n of a problem that can be solved in time t, assuming that
the algorithm to solve the problem takes f (n) microseconds.

Chapter notes

There are many excellent texts on the general topic of algorithms,
including those by Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5, 6], Dasgupta,
Papadimitriou, and Vazirani [107], Edmonds [133], Erickson [135],
Goodrich and Tamassia [195, 196], Kleinberg and Tardos [257], Knuth
[259, 260, 261, 262, 263], Levitin [298], Louridas [305], Mehlhorn and
Sanders [325], Mitzenmacher and Upfal [331], Neapolitan [342],
Roughgarden [385, 386, 387, 388], Sanders, Mehlhorn, Dietzfelbinger,
and Dementiev [393], Sedgewick and Wayne [402], Skiena [414], SoltysKulinicz [419], Wilf [455], and Williamson and Shmoys [459]. Some of
the more practical aspects of algorithm design are discussed by Bentley
[49, 50, 51], Bhargava [54], Kochenderfer and Wheeler [268], and
McGeoch [321]. Surveys of the field of algorithms can also be found in
books by Atallah and Blanton [27, 28] and Mehta and Sahhi [326]. For
less technical material, see the books by Christian and Griffiths [92],
Cormen [104], Erwig [136], MacCormick [307], and Vöcking et al. [448].
Overviews of the algorithms used in computational biology can be
found in books by Jones and Pevzner [240], Elloumi and Zomaya [134],
and Marchisio [315].

1 Sometimes, when the problem context is known, problem instances are themselves simply
called "problems."

2 To be precise, only decision problems--those with a "yes/no" answer--can be NP-complete.
The decision version of the traveling salesperson problem asks whether there exists an order of
stops whose distance totals at most a given amount.

2 Getting Started

This chapter will familiarize you with the framework we'll use
throughout the book to think about the design and analysis of
algorithms. It is self-contained, but it does include several references to
material that will be introduced in Chapters 3 and 4. (It also contains
several summations, which Appendix A shows how to solve.)

We'll begin by examining the insertion sort algorithm to solve the
sorting problem introduced in Chapter 1. We'll specify algorithms using
a pseudocode that should be understandable to you if you have done
computer programming. We'll see why insertion sort correctly sorts and
analyze its running time. The analysis introduces a notation that
describes how running time increases with the number of items to be
sorted. Following a discussion of insertion sort, we'll use a method
called divide-and-conquer to develop a sorting algorithm called merge
sort. We'll end with an analysis of merge sort's running time.