20.1 Representations of graphs

You can choose between two standard ways to represent a graph G =
(V, E): as a collection of adjacency lists or as an adjacency matrix.

Either way applies to both directed and undirected graphs. Because the

adjacency-list representation provides a compact way to represent

sparse graphs--those for which |E| is much less than |V|2--it is usually

the method of choice. Most of the graph algorithms presented in this
book assume that an input graph is represented in adjacency-list form.
You might prefer an adjacency-matrix representation, however, when

the graph is dense--|E| is close to |V|2--or when you need to be able to

tell quickly whether there is an edge connecting two given vertices. For
example, two of the all-pairs shortest-paths algorithms presented in
Chapter 23 assume that their input graphs are represented by
adjacency matrices.

Figure 20.1 Two representations of an undirected graph. (a) An undirected graph G with 5
vertices and 7 edges. (b) An adjacency-list representation of G. (c) The adjacency-matrix
representation of G.

Figure 20.2 Two representations of a directed graph. (a) A directed graph G with 6 vertices
and 8 edges. (b) An adjacency-list representation of G. (c) The adjacency-matrix
representation of G.

The adjacency-list representation of a graph G = (V, E) consists of an
array Adj of |V| lists, one for each vertex in V. For each u V, the
adjacency list Adj[u] contains all the vertices v such that there is an edge
(u, v) E. That is, Adj[u] consists of all the vertices adjacent to u in G.

(Alternatively, it can contain pointers to these vertices.) Since the

adjacency lists represent the edges of a graph, our pseudocode treats

the array Adj as an attribute of the graph, just like the edge set E. In
pseudocode, therefore, you will see notation such as G.Adj[u]. Figure

20.1(b) is an adjacency-list representation of the undirected graph in

Figure 20.1(a). Similarly, Figure 20.2(b) is an adjacency-list

representation of the directed graph in Figure 20.2(a).

If G is a directed graph, the sum of the lengths of all the adjacency
lists is |E|, since an edge of the form (u, v) is represented by having v
appear in Adj[u]. If G is an undirected graph, the sum of the lengths of
all the adjacency lists is 2 |E|, since if (u, v) is an undirected edge, then u
appears in v's adjacency list and vice versa. For both directed and

undirected graphs, the adjacency-list representation has the desirable

property that the amount of memory it requires is (V + E). Finding
each edge in the graph also takes (V + E) time, rather than just (E),
since each of the |V| adjacency lists must be examined. Of course, if |E|
= (V)--such as in a connected, undirected graph or a strongly

connected, directed graph--we can say that finding each edge takes

(E) time.
Adjacency lists can also represent weighted graphs, that is, graphs for

which each edge has an associated weight given by a weight function w :
E . For example, let G = (V, E) be a weighted graph with weight
function w. Then you can simply store the weight w(u, v) of the edge (u,
v) E with vertex v in u's adjacency list. The adjacency-list

representation is quite robust in that you can modify it to support many

other graph variants.

A potential disadvantage of the adjacency-list representation is that

it provides no quicker way to determine whether a given edge (u, v) is
present in the graph than to search for v in the adjacency list Adj[u]. An

adjacency-matrix representation of the graph remedies this

disadvantage, but at the cost of using asymptotically more memory.

(See Exercise 20.1-8 for suggestions of variations on adjacency lists that

permit faster edge lookup.)

The adjacency-matrix representation of a graph G = (V, E) assumes
that the vertices are numbered 1, 2, ... , |V| in some arbitrary manner.

Then the adjacency-matrix representation of a graph G consists of a |V|
× |V| matrix A = (aij) such that

Figures 20.1(c) and 20.2(c) are the adjacency matrices of the undirected
and directed graphs in Figures 20.1(a) and 20.2(a), respectively. The

adjacency matrix of a graph requires (V2) memory, independent of

the number of edges in the graph. Because finding each edge in the
graph requires examining the entire adjacency matrix, doing so takes

(V2) time.

Observe the symmetry along the main diagonal of the adjacency

matrix in Figure 20.1(c). Since in an undirected graph, (u, v) and (v, u)

represent the same edge, the adjacency matrix A of an undirected graph

is its own transpose: A = AT. In some applications, it pays to store only

the entries on and above the diagonal of the adjacency matrix, thereby
cutting the memory needed to store the graph almost in half.

Like the adjacency-list representation of a graph, an adjacency

matrix can represent a weighted graph. For example, if G = (V, E) is a
weighted graph with edge-weight function w, you can store the weight
w(u, v) of the edge (u, v) E as the entry in row u and column v of the

adjacency matrix. If an edge does not exist, you can store a NIL value
as its corresponding matrix entry, though for many problems it is
convenient to use a value such as 0 or .

Although the adjacency-list representation is asymptotically at least
as space-efficient as the adjacency-matrix representation, adjacency
matrices are simpler, and so you might prefer them when graphs are
reasonably small. Moreover, adjacency matrices carry a further
advantage for unweighted graphs: they require only one bit per entry.

Representing attributes

Most algorithms that operate on graphs need to maintain attributes for
vertices and/or edges. We indicate these attributes using our usual

notation, such as v.d for an attribute d of a vertex v. When we indicate

edges as pairs of vertices, we use the same style of notation. For

example, if edges have an attribute f, then we denote this attribute for
edge (u, v) by (u, v).f. For the purpose of presenting and understanding

algorithms, our attribute notation suffices.
Implementing vertex and edge attributes in real programs can be

another story entirely. There is no one best way to store and access
vertex and edge attributes. For a given situation, your decision will likely
depend on the programming language you are using, the algorithm you
are implementing, and how the rest of your program uses the graph. If
you represent a graph using adjacency lists, one design choice is to

represent vertex attributes in additional arrays, such as an array d[1 :
|V|] that parallels the Adj array. If the vertices adjacent to u belong to
Adj[u], then the attribute u.d can actually be stored in the array entry
d[u]. Many other ways of implementing attributes are possible. For

example, in an object-oriented programming language, vertex attributes
might be represented as instance variables within a subclass of a Vertex
class.

Exercises

20.1-1

Given an adjacency-list representation of a directed graph, how long
does it take to compute the out-degree of every vertex? How long does
it take to compute the in-degrees?

20.1-2

Give an adjacency-list representation for a complete binary tree on 7
vertices. Give an equivalent adjacency-matrix representation. Assume
that the edges are undirected and that the vertices are numbered from 1
to 7 as in a binary heap.

20.1-3
The transpose of a directed graph G = (V, E) is the graph GT = (V, ET),
where ET = {(v, u) V × V : (u, v) E}. That is, GT is G with all its
edges reversed. Describe efficient algorithms for computing GT from G,

for both the adjacency-list and adjacency-matrix representations of G.

Analyze the running times of your algorithms.

20.1-4
Given an adjacency-list representation of a multigraph G = (V, E),
describe an O(V + E)-time algorithm to compute the adjacency-list
representation of the "equivalent" undirected graph G = (V, E), where
E consists of the edges in E with all multiple edges between two vertices

replaced by a single edge and with all self-loops removed.

20.1-5
The square of a directed graph G = (V, E) is the graph G2 = (V, E2)
such that (u, v) E2 if and only if G contains a path with at most two
edges between u and v. Describe efficient algorithms for computing G2
from G for both the adjacency-list and adjacency-matrix
representations of G. Analyze the running times of your algorithms.

20.1-6

Most graph algorithms that take an adjacency-matrix representation as

input require (V2) time, but there are some exceptions. Show how to
determine whether a directed graph G contains a universal sink--a
vertex with in-degree |V| 1 and out-degree 0--in O(V) time, given an
adjacency matrix for G.

20.1-7
The incidence matrix of a directed graph G = (V, E) with no self-loops is
a |V| × |E| matrix B = (bij) such that

Describe what the entries of the matrix product BBT represent, where
BT is the transpose of B.

20.1-8

Suppose that instead of a linked list, each array entry Adj[u] is a hash
table containing the vertices v for which (u, v) E, with collisions

resolved by chaining. Under the assumption of uniform independent
hashing, if all edge lookups are equally likely, what is the expected time
to determine whether an edge is in the graph? What disadvantages does
this scheme have? Suggest an alternate data structure for each edge list
that solves these problems. Does your alternative have disadvantages
compared with the hash table?