20.2 Breadth-first search

Breadth-first search is one of the simplest algorithms for searching a

graph and the archetype for many important graph algorithms. Prim's
minimum-spanning-tree algorithm (Section 21.2) and Dijkstra's singlesource shortest-paths algorithm (Section 22.3) use ideas similar to those
in breadth-first search.

Given a graph G = (V, E) and a distinguished source vertex s,
breadth-first search systematically explores the edges of G to
"discover" every vertex that is reachable from s. It computes the
distance from s to each reachable vertex, where the distance to a vertex
v equals the smallest number of edges needed to go from s to v.
Breadth-first search also produces a "breadth-first tree" with root s
that contains all reachable vertices. For any vertex v reachable from s,
the simple path in the breadth-first tree from s to v corresponds to a
shortest path from s to v in G, that is, a path containing the smallest

number of edges. The algorithm works on both directed and undirected
graphs.

Breadth-first search is so named because it expands the frontier
between discovered and undiscovered vertices uniformly across the
breadth of the frontier. You can think of it as discovering vertices in

waves emanating from the source vertex. That is, starting from s, the
algorithm first discovers all neighbors of s, which have distance 1. Then

it discovers all vertices with distance 2, then all vertices with distance 3,

and so on, until it has discovered every vertex reachable from s.

In order to keep track of the waves of vertices, breadth-first search

could maintain separate arrays or lists of the vertices at each distance

from the source vertex. Instead, it uses a single first-in, first-out queue

(see Section 10.1.3) containing some vertices at a distance k, possibly
followed by some vertices at distance k + 1. The queue, therefore,

contains portions of two consecutive waves at any time.

To keep track of progress, breadth-first search colors each vertex

white, gray, or black. All vertices start out white, and vertices not

reachable from the source vertex s stay white the entire time. A vertex
that is reachable from s is discovered the first time it is encountered

during the search, at which time it becomes gray, indicating that is now

on the frontier of the search: the boundary between discovered and

undiscovered vertices. The queue contains all the gray vertices.

Eventually, all the edges of a gray vertex will be explored, so that all of

its neighbors will be discovered. Once all of a vertex's edges have been

explored, the vertex is behind the frontier of the search, and it goes

from gray to black.1

Breadth-first search constructs a breadth-first tree, initially

containing only its root, which is the source vertex s. Whenever the
search discovers a white vertex v in the course of scanning the
adjacency list of a gray vertex u, the vertex v and the edge (u, v) are
added to the tree. We say that u is the predecessor or parent of v in the
breadth-first tree. Since every vertex reachable from s is discovered at
most once, each vertex reachable from s has exactly one parent. (There
is one exception: because s is the root of the breadth-first tree, it has no

parent.) Ancestor and descendant relationships in the breadth-first tree

are defined relative to the root s as usual: if u is on the simple path in
the tree from the root s to vertex v, then u is an ancestor of v and v is a
descendant of u.

The breadth-first-search procedure BFS on the following page

assumes that the graph G = (V, E) is represented using adjacency lists.
It denotes the queue by Q, and it attaches three additional attributes to
each vertex v in the graph:

v.color is the color of v: WHITE, GRAY, or BLACK.

v.d holds the distance from the source vertex s to v, as computed

by the algorithm.

v. is v's predecessor in the breadth-first tree. If v has no

predecessor because it is the source vertex or is undiscovered,

then v. NIL.

Figure 20.3 illustrates the progress of BFS on an undirected graph.
The procedure BFS works as follows. With the exception of the

source vertex s, lines 14 paint every vertex white, set u.d = for each
vertex u, and set the parent of every vertex to be NIL. Because the
source vertex s is always the first vertex discovered, lines 57 paint s
gray, set s.d to 0, and set the predecessor of s to NIL. Lines 89 create
the queue Q, initially containing just the source vertex.

The while loop of lines 1018 iterates as long as there remain gray
vertices, which are on the frontier: discovered vertices that have not yet

had their adjacency lists fully examined. This while loop maintains the
following invariant:

At the test in line 10, the queue Q consists of the set of gray

vertices.

Although we won't use this loop invariant to prove correctness, it is easy
to see that it holds prior to the first iteration and that each iteration of
the loop maintains the invariant. Prior to the first iteration, the only

gray vertex, and the only vertex in Q, is the source vertex s. Line 11
determines the gray vertex u at the head of the queue Q and removes it
from Q. The for loop of lines 1217 considers each vertex v in the
adjacency list of u. If v is white, then it has not yet been discovered, and

the procedure discovers it by executing lines 1417. These lines paint

vertex v gray, set v's distance v.d to u.d + 1, record u as v's parent v.,
and place v at the tail of the queue Q. Once the procedure has examined
all the vertices on u's adjacency list, it blackens u in line 18, indicating
that u is now behind the frontier. The loop invariant is maintained

because whenever a vertex is painted gray (in line 14) it is also
enqueued (in line 17), and whenever a vertex is dequeued (in line 11) it
is also painted black (in line 18).

BFS(G, s)

1for each vertex u G.V {s}

2 u.color = WHITE

3 u.d =

4 u. NIL

5s.color = GRAY

6s.d = 0

7s. NIL

8Q = Ø

9ENQUEUE(Q, s)

10while Q Ø

11 u = DEQUEUE(Q)

12 for each vertex v in G.Adj[u] // search the neighbors of u
// is v being discovered now?
13 if v.color == WHITE
// v is now on the frontier
14 v.color = GRAY // u is now behind the frontier

15 v.d = u.d + 1

16 v. = u

17 ENQUEUEd(Q, v)

18 u.color = BLACK

The results of breadth-first search may depend upon the order in

which the neighbors of a given vertex are visited in line 12: the breadth-

first tree may vary, but the distances d computed by the algorithm do

not. (See Exercise 20.2-5.)

A simple change allows the BFS procedure to terminate in many

cases before the queue Q becomes empty. Because each vertex is
discovered at most once and receives a finite d value only when it is
discovered, the algorithm can terminate once every vertex has a finite d

value. If BFS keeps count of how many vertices have been discovered, it

can terminate once either the queue Q is empty or all |V| vertices are

discovered.

Figure 20.3 The operation of BFS on an undirected graph. Each part shows the graph and the

queue Q at the beginning of each iteration of the while loop of lines 1018. Vertex distances

appear within each vertex and below vertices in the queue. The tan region surrounds the
frontier of the search, consisting of the vertices in the queue. The light blue region surrounds
the vertices behind the frontier, which have been dequeued. Each part highlights in orange the
vertex dequeued and the breadth-first tree edges added, if any, in the previous iteration. Blue
edges belong to the breadth-first tree constructed so far.

Analysis

Before proving the various properties of breadth-first search, let's take

on the easier job of analyzing its running time on an input graph G =
(V, E). We use aggregate analysis, as we saw in Section 16.1. After

initialization, breadth-first search never whitens a vertex, and thus the

test in line 13 ensures that each vertex is enqueued at most once, and
hence dequeued at most once. The operations of enqueuing and

dequeuing take O(1) time, and so the total time devoted to queue
operations is O(V). Because the procedure scans the adjacency list of

each vertex only when the vertex is dequeued, it scans each adjacency

list at most once. Since the sum of the lengths of all |V| adjacency lists is
(E), the total time spent in scanning adjacency lists is O(V + E). The
overhead for initialization is O(V), and thus the total running time of
the BFS procedure is O(V + E). Thus, breadth-first search runs in time
linear in the size of the adjacency-list representation of G.

Shortest paths

Now, let's see why breadth-first search finds the shortest distance from

a given source vertex s to each vertex in a graph. Define the shortestpath distance (s, v) from s to v as the minimum number of edges in any
path from vertex s to vertex v. If there is no path from s to v, then (s,
v) = . We call a path of length (s, v) from s to v a shortest path2 from
s to v. Before showing that breadth-first search correctly computes

shortest-path distances, we investigate an important property of
shortest-path distances.

Lemma 20.1
Let G = (V, E) be a directed or undirected graph, and let s V be an
arbitrary vertex. Then, for any edge (u, v) E,

(s, v) (s, u) + 1.

Proof If u is reachable from s, then so is v. In this case, the shortest
path from s to v cannot be longer than the shortest path from s to u
followed by the edge (u, v), and thus the inequality holds. If u is not
reachable from s, then (s, u) = , and again, the inequality holds.

Our goal is to show that the BFS procedure properly computes v.d =
(s, v) for each vertex v V. We first show that v.d bounds (s, v) from

above.

Lemma 20.2
Let G = (V, E) be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS
is run on G from a given source vertex s V. Then, for each vertex v
V, the value v.d computed by BFS satisfies v.d (s, v) at all times,

including at termination.

Proof The lemma is true intuitively, because any finite value assigned
to v.d equals the number of edges on some path from s to v. The formal

proof is by induction on the number of ENQUEUE operations. The

inductive hypothesis is that v.d (s, v) for all v V.

The base case of the induction is the situation immediately after

enqueuing s in line 9 of BFS. The inductive hypothesis holds here,
because s.d = 0 = (s, s) and v.d = 1 (s, v) for all v V {s}.

For the inductive step, consider a white vertex v that is discovered
during the search from a vertex u. The inductive hypothesis implies that
u.d (s, u). The assignment performed by line 15 and Lemma 20.1 give

v.d = u.d + 1
(s, u) + 1
(s, v).

Vertex v is then enqueued, and it is never enqueued again because it is

also grayed and lines 1417 execute only for white vertices. Thus, the

value of v.d never changes again, and the inductive hypothesis is

maintained.

To prove that v.d = (s, v), we first show more precisely how the
queue Q operates during the course of BFS. The next lemma shows that
at all times, the d values of vertices in the queue either are all the same
or form a sequence k, k, ... , k, k + 1, k + 1, ... , k + 1 for some integer
k 0.

Lemma 20.3
Suppose that during the execution of BFS on a graph G = (V, E), the
queue Q contains the vertices v1, v2, ... , vr, where v1 is the head of Q

and vr is the tail. Then, vr.d v1.d + 1 and vi.d vi+1.d for i = 1, 2, ... , r

1.

Proof The proof is by induction on the number of queue operations.
Initially, when the queue contains only s, the lemma trivially holds.

For the inductive step, we must prove that the lemma holds after

both dequeuing and enqueuing a vertex. First, we examine dequeuing.

When the head v1 of the queue is dequeued, v2 becomes the new head.

(If the queue becomes empty, then the lemma holds vacuously.) By the

inductive hypothesis, v1.d v2.d. But then we have vr.d v1.d+1 v2.d

+ 1, and the remaining inequalities are unaffected. Thus, the lemma

follows with v2 as the new head.

Now, we examine enqueuing. When line 17 of BFS enqueues a vertex

v onto a queue containing vertices v1, v2, ... , vr, the enqueued vertex
becomes vr+1. If the queue was empty before v was enqueued, then
after enqueuing v, we have r = 1 and the lemma trivially holds. Now
suppose that the queue was nonempty when v was enqueued. At that
time, the procedure has most recently removed vertex u, whose
adjacency list is currently being scanned, from the queue Q. Just before
u was removed, we had u = v1 and the inductive hypothesis held, so that
u.d v2.d and vr.d u.d + 1. After u is removed from the queue, the
vertex that had been v2 becomes the new head v1 of the queue, so that
now u.d v1.d. Thus, vr+1.d = v.d = u.d + 1 v1.d + 1. Since vr.d u.d +
1, we have vr.d u.d + 1 = v.d = vr+1.d, and the remaining inequalities
are unaffected. Thus, the lemma follows when v is enqueued.

The following corollary shows that the d values at the time that

vertices are enqueued monotonically increase over time.

Corollary 20.4
Suppose that vertices vi and vj are enqueued during the execution of
BFS, and that vi is enqueued before vj. Then vi.d vj.d at the time that vj

is enqueued.

Proof Immediate from Lemma 20.3 and the property that each vertex
receives a finite d value at most once during the course of BFS.

We can now prove that breadth-first search correctly finds shortestpath distances.

Theorem 20.5 (Correctness of breadth-first search)
Let G = (V, E) be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS
is run on G from a given source vertex s V. Then, during its execution,
BFS discovers every vertex v V that is reachable from the source s,
and upon termination, v.d = (s, v) for all v V. Moreover, for any
vertex v s that is reachable from s, one of the shortest paths from s to
v is a shortest path from s to v. followed by the edge (v., v).

Proof Assume for the purpose of contradiction that some vertex
receives a d value not equal to its shortest-path distance. Of all such
vertices, let v be a vertex that has the minimum (s, v). By Lemma 20.2,
we have v.d (s, v), and thus v.d > (s, v). We cannot have v = s,
because s.d = 0 and (s, s) = 0. Vertex v must be reachable from s, for
otherwise we would have (s, v) = v.d. Let u be the vertex
immediately preceding v on some shortest path from s to v (since v s,
vertex u must exist), so that (s, v) = (s, u)+1. Because (s, u) < (s, v),
and because of how we chose v, we have u.d = (s, u). Putting these

properties together gives

Now consider the time when BFS chooses to dequeue vertex u from
Q in line 11. At this time, vertex v is either white, gray, or black. We shall

show that each of these cases leads to a contradiction of inequality

(20.1). If v is white, then line 15 sets v.d = u.d + 1, contradicting
inequality (20.1). If v is black, then it was already removed from the
queue and, by Corollary 20.4, we have v.d u.d, again contradicting
inequality (20.1). If v is gray, then it was painted gray upon dequeuing
some vertex w, which was removed from Q earlier than u and for which
v.d = w.d + 1. By Corollary 20.4, however, w.d u.d, and so v.d = w.d + 1
u.d + 1, once again contradicting inequality (20.1).

Thus we conclude that v.d = (s, v) for all v V. All vertices v
reachable from s must be discovered, for otherwise they would have =
v.d > (s, v). To conclude the proof of the theorem, observe from lines
1516 that if v. = u, then v.d = u.d + 1. Thus, to form a shortest path
from s to v, take a shortest path from s to v. and then traverse the edge
(v. v).

Breadth-first trees

The blue edges in Figure 20.3 show the breadth-first tree built by the

BFS procedure as it searches the graph. The tree corresponds to the
attributes. More formally, for a graph G = (V, E) with source s, we
define the predecessor subgraph of G as G = (V, E), where

and

The predecessor subgraph G is a breadth-first tree if V consists of the
vertices reachable from s and, for all v V, the subgraph G contains a
unique simple path from s to v that is also a shortest path from s to v in
G. A breadth-first tree is in fact a tree, since it is connected and |E| =
|V| - 1 (see Theorem B.2 on page 1169). We call the edges in Etree
edges.

The following lemma shows that the predecessor subgraph produced
by the BFS procedure is a breadth-first tree.

Lemma 20.6
When applied to a directed or undirected graph G = (V, E), procedure
BFS constructs so that the predecessor subgraph G = (V, E) is a

breadth-first tree.

Proof Line 16 of BFS sets v. = u if and only if (u, v) = E and (s, v) <
--that is, if v is reachable from s--and thus V consists of the vertices

in V reachable from s. Since the predecessor subgraph G forms a tree,
by Theorem B.2, it contains a unique simple path from s to each vertex
in V. Applying Theorem 20.5 inductively yields that every such path is
a shortest path in G.

The PRINT-PATH procedure prints out the vertices on a shortest

path from s to v, assuming that BFS has already computed a breadth-

first tree. This procedure runs in time linear in the number of vertices in
the path printed, since each recursive call is for a path one vertex
shorter.

PRINT-PATH(G, s, v)
1if v == s
2 print s
3elseif v. == NIL
4 print "no path from" s "to" v "exists"
5else PRINT-PATH(G, s, v.)
6 print v

Exercises

20.2-1
Show the d and values that result from running breadth-first search

on the directed graph of Figure 20.2(a), using vertex 3 as the source.

20.2-2
Show the d and values that result from running breadth-first search
on the undirected graph of Figure 20.3, using vertex u as the source.

Assume that neighbors of a vertex are visited in alphabetical order.

20.2-3

Show that using a single bit to store each vertex color suffices by
arguing that the BFS procedure produces the same result if line 18 is
removed. Then show how to obviate the need for vertex colors
altogether.

20.2-4

What is the running time of BFS if we represent its input graph by an
adjacency matrix and modify the algorithm to handle this form of
input?

20.2-5
Argue that in a breadth-first search, the value u.d assigned to a vertex u

is independent of the order in which the vertices appear in each
adjacency list. Using Figure 20.3 as an example, show that the breadthfirst tree computed by BFS can depend on the ordering within
adjacency lists.

20.2-6
Give an example of a directed graph G = (V, E), a source vertex s V,
and a set of tree edges E E such that for each vertex v V, the
unique simple path in the graph (V, E) from s to v is a shortest path in
G, yet the set of edges E cannot be produced by running BFS on G, no

matter how the vertices are ordered in each adjacency list.

20.2-7

There are two types of professional wrestlers: "faces" (short for
"babyfaces," i.e., "good guys") and "heels" ("bad guys"). Between any
pair of professional wrestlers, there may or may not be a rivalry. You

are given the names of n professional wrestlers and a list of r pairs of
wrestlers for which there are rivalries. Give an O(n + r)-time algorithm

that determines whether it is possible to designate some of the wrestlers
as faces and the remainder as heels such that each rivalry is between a
face and a heel. If it is possible to perform such a designation, your
algorithm should produce it.

20.2-8
The diameter of a tree T = (V, E) is defined as max {(u, v) : u, v V},

that is, the largest of all shortest-path distances in the tree. Give an
efficient algorithm to compute the diameter of a tree, and analyze the
running time of your algorithm.