20.5 Strongly connected components

We now consider a classic application of depth-first search:
decomposing a directed graph into its strongly connected components.
This section shows how to do so using two depth-first searches. Many
algorithms that work with directed graphs begin with such a
decomposition. After decomposing the graph into strongly connected
components, such algorithms run separately on each one and then
combine the solutions according to the structure of connections among
components.

Recall from Appendix B that a strongly connected component of a

directed graph G = (V, E) is a maximal set of vertices C V such that
for every pair of vertices u, v C, both u v and v u, that is, vertices
u and v are reachable from each other. Figure 20.9 shows an example.

The algorithm for finding the strongly connected components of a

directed graph G = (V, E) uses the transpose of G, which we defined in

Exercise 20.1-3 to be the graph GT = (V, ET), where ET = {(u, v) : (v, u)

E}. That is, ET consists of the edges of G with their directions
reversed. Given an adjacency-list representation of G, the time to create

GT is (V + E). The graphs G and GT have exactly the same strongly
connected components: u and v are reachable from each other in G if

and only if they are reachable from each other in GT. Figure 20.9(b)

shows the transpose of the graph in Figure 20.9(a), with the strongly

connected components shaded blue in both parts.

The linear-time (i.e., (V + E)-time) procedure STRONGLY-

CONNECTED-COMPONENTS on the next page computes the

strongly connected components of a directed graph G = (V, E) using

two depth-first searches, one on G and one on GT.

The idea behind this algorithm comes from a key property of the

component graph GSCC = (VSCC, ESCC), defined as follows. Suppose
that G has strongly connected components C1, C2, ... , Ck. The vertex

set VSCC is {v1, v2, ... , vk}, and it contains one vertex vi for each

strongly connected component Ci of G. There is an edge (vi, vj) ESCC
if G contains a directed edge (x, y) for some x Ci and some y Cj.

Looked at another way, if we contract all edges whose incident vertices

are within the same strongly connected component of G so that only a

single vertex remains, the resulting graph is GSCC. Figure 20.9(c) shows

the component graph of the graph in Figure 20.9(a).

Figure 20.9 (a) A directed graph G. Each region shaded light blue is a strongly connected
component of G. Each vertex is labeled with its discovery and finish times in a depth-first
search, and tree edges are dark blue. (b) The graph GT, the transpose of G, with the depth-first

forest computed in line 3 of STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS shown and tree
edges shaded dark blue. Each strongly connected component corresponds to one depth-first

tree. Orange vertices b, c, g, and h are the roots of the depth-first trees produced by the depthfirst search of GT. (c) The acyclic component graph GSCC obtained by contracting all edges
within each strongly connected component of G so that only a single vertex remains in each

component.

STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS(G)
1 call DFS(G) to compute finish times u.f for each vertex u
2 create GT
3 call DFS(GT), but in the main loop of DFS, consider the vertices in

order of decreasing u.f (as computed in line 1)

4 output the vertices of each tree in the depth-first forest formed in
line 3 as a separate strongly connected component

The following lemma gives the key property that the component
graph is acyclic. We'll see that the algorithm uses this property to visit
the vertices of the component graph in topologically sorted order, by
considering vertices in the second depth-first search in decreasing order
of the finish times that were computed in the first depth-first search.

Lemma 20.13
Let C and C be distinct strongly connected components in directed
graph G = (V, E), let u, v C, let u, v C, and suppose that G contains
a path u u. Then G cannot also contain a path v v.

Proof If G contains a path v v, then it contains paths u u v
and v v u. Thus, u and v are reachable from each other, thereby
contradicting the assumption that C and C are distinct strongly

connected components.

Because the STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS
procedure performs two depth-first searches, there are two distinct sets
of discovery and finish times. In this section, discovery and finish times

always refer to those computed by the first call of DFS, in line 1.

The notation for discovery and finish times extends to sets of

vertices. For a subset U of vertices, d(U) and f(U) are the earliest
discovery time and latest finish time, respectively, of any vertex in U:
d(U) = min {u.d : u U} and f(U) = max {u.f : u U}.

The following lemma and its corollary give a key property relating
strongly connected components and finish times in the first depth-first
search.

Lemma 20.14
Let C and C be distinct strongly connected components in directed
graph G = (V, E). Suppose that there is an edge (u, v) E, where u C
and v C. Then f(C) > f(C).

Proof We consider two cases, depending on which strongly connected
component, C or C, had the first discovered vertex during the first

depth-first search.

If d(C) < d(C), let x be the first vertex discovered in C. At time x.d,
all vertices in C and C are white. At that time, G contains a path from x
to each vertex in C consisting only of white vertices. Because (u, v) E,
for any vertex w C, there is also a path in G at time x.d from x to w
consisting only of white vertices: x u v w. By the white-path
theorem, all vertices in C and C become descendants of x in the depth-

first tree. By Corollary 20.8, x has the latest finish time of any of its
descendants, and so x.f = f(C) > f(C).

Otherwise, d(C) > d(C). Let y be the first vertex discovered in C, so
that y.d = d(C). At time y.d, all vertices in C are white and G contains a
path from y to each vertex in C consisting only of white vertices. By the
white-path theorem, all vertices in C become descendants of y in the
depth-first tree, and by Corollary 20.8, y.f = f(C). Because d(C) > d(C)
= y.d, all vertices in C are white at time y.d. Since there is an edge (u, v)
from C to C, Lemma 20.13 implies that there cannot be a path from C
to C. Hence, no vertex in C is reachable from y. At time y.f, therefore,
all vertices in C are still white. Thus, for any vertex w C, we have w.f
> y.f, which implies that f(C) > f(C).

Corollary 20.15
Let C and C be distinct strongly connected components in directed
graph G = (V, E), and suppose that f(C) > f(C). Then ET contains no
edge (v, u) such that u = C and v C.

Proof The contrapositive of Lemma 20.14 says that if f(C) < f(C),
then there is no edge (u, v) E such that u C and v C. Because the
strongly connected components of G and GT are the same, if there is no
such edge (u, v) E, then there is no edge (v, u) ET such that u C
and v C.

Corollary 20.15 provides the key to understanding why the strongly

connected components algorithm works. Let's examine what happens

during the second depth-first search, which is on GT. The search starts
from the vertex x whose finish time from the first depth-first search is

maximum. This vertex belongs to some strongly connected component

C, and since x.f is maximum, f(C) is maximum over all strongly
connected components. When the search starts from x, it visits all
vertices in C. By Corollary 20.15, GT contains no edges from C to any
other strongly connected component, and so the search from x never

visits vertices in any other component. Thus, the tree rooted at x
contains exactly the vertices of C. Having completed visiting all vertices
in C, the second depth-first search selects as a new root a vertex from
some other strongly connected component C whose finish time f(C) is
maximum over all components other than C. Again, the search visits all
vertices in C. But by Corollary 20.15, if any edges in GT go from C to
any other component, they must go to C, which the second depth-first
search has already visited. In general, when the depth-first search of GT

in line 3 visits any strongly connected component, any edges out of that

component must be to components that the search has already visited.

Each depth-first tree, therefore, corresponds to exactly one strongly

connected component. The following theorem formalizes this argument.

Theorem 20.16

The STRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS procedure correctly

computes the strongly connected components of the directed graph G

provided as its input.

Proof We argue by induction on the number of depth-first trees found
in the depth-first search of GT in line 3 that the vertices of each tree

form a strongly connected component. The inductive hypothesis is that

the first k trees produced in line 3 are strongly connected components.
The basis for the induction, when k = 0, is trivial.

In the inductive step, we assume that each of the first k depth-first

trees produced in line 3 is a strongly connected component, and we

consider the (k + 1)st tree produced. Let the root of this tree be vertex
u, and let u be in strongly connected component C. Because of how the
depth-first search chooses roots in line 3, u.f = f(C) > f(C) for any
strongly connected component C other than C that has yet to be
visited. By the inductive hypothesis, at the time that the search visits u,
all other vertices of C are white. By the white-path theorem, therefore,
all other vertices of C are descendants of u in its depth-first tree.

Moreover, by the inductive hypothesis and by Corollary 20.15, any

edges in GT that leave C must be to strongly connected components

that have already been visited. Thus, no vertex in any strongly

connected component other than C is a descendant of u during the
depth-first search of GT. The vertices of the depth-first tree in GT that
is rooted at u form exactly one strongly connected component, which

completes the inductive step and the proof.

Here is another way to look at how the second depth-first search

operates. Consider the component graph (GT)SCC of GT. If you map

each strongly connected component visited in the second depth-first

search to a vertex of (GT)SCC, the second depth-first search visits
vertices of (GT)SCC in the reverse of a topologically sorted order. If
you reverse the edges of (GT)SCC, you get the graph ((GT)SCC)T.
Because ((GT)SCC)T = GSCC (see Exercise 20.5-4), the second depthfirst search visits the vertices of GSCC in topologically sorted order.

Exercises

20.5-1

How can the number of strongly connected components of a graph
change if a new edge is added?

20.5-2

Show how the procedure STRONGLY-CONNECTEDCOMPONENTS works on the graph of Figure 20.6. Specifically, show
the finish times computed in line 1 and the forest produced in line 3.
Assume that the loop of lines 57 of DFS considers vertices in
alphabetical order and that the adjacency lists are in alphabetical order.

20.5-3

Professor Bacon rewrites the algorithm for strongly connected
components to use the original (instead of the transpose) graph in the

second depth-first search and scan the vertices in order of increasing

finish times. Does this modified algorithm always produce correct
results?

20.5-4
Prove that for any directed graph G, the transpose of the component
graph of GT is the same as the component graph of G. That is,
((GT)SCC)T = GSCC.

20.5-5
Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to compute the component graph of a
directed graph G = (V, E). Make sure that there is at most one edge

between two vertices in the component graph your algorithm produces.

20.5-6
Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm that, given a directed graph G = (V,
E), constructs another graph G = (V, E) such that G and G have the
same strongly connected components, G has the same component
graph as G, and |E| is as small as possible.

20.5-7
A directed graph G = (V, E) is semiconnected if, for all pairs of vertices
u, v V, we have u v or v u. Give an efficient algorithm to
determine whether G is semiconnected. Prove that your algorithm is

correct, and analyze its running time.

20.5-8
Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph, and let l : V be a function that
assigns a real-valued label l to each vertex. For vertices s, t V, define

Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to find vertices s and t such that l(s,
t) is maximum over all pairs of vertices. (Hint: Use Exercise 20.5-5.)

Problems

20-1 Classifying edges by breadth-first search

A depth-first forest classifies the edges of a graph into tree, back,
forward, and cross edges. A breadth-first tree can also be used to
classify the edges reachable from the source of the search into the same
four categories.

Figure 20.10 The articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components of a connected,
undirected graph for use in Problem 20-2. The articulation points are the orange vertices, the
bridges are the dark blue edges, and the biconnected components are the edges in the light

blue regions, with a bcc numbering shown.

a. Prove that in a breadth-first search of an undirected graph, the

following properties hold:
1. There are no back edges and no forward edges.

2. If (u, v) is a tree edge, then v.d = u.d + 1.
3. If (u, v) is a cross edge, then v.d = u.d or v.d = u.d + 1.
b. Prove that in a breadth-first search of a directed graph, the following

properties hold:
1. There are no forward edges.

2. If (u, v) is a tree edge, then v.d = u.d + 1.
3. If (u, v) is a cross edge, then v.d u.d + 1.
4. If (u, v) is a back edge, then 0 v.d u.d.

20-2 Articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components
Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph. An articulation point
of G is a vertex whose removal disconnects G. A bridge of G is an edge
whose removal disconnects G. A biconnected component of G is a

maximal set of edges such that any two edges in the set lie on a common
simple cycle. Figure 20.10 illustrates these definitions. You can

determine articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components

using depth-first search. Let G = (V, E) be a depth-first tree of G.
a. Prove that the root of G is an articulation point of G if and only if it

has at least two children in G.
b. Let v be a nonroot vertex of G. Prove that v is an articulation point

of G if and only if v has a child s such that there is no back edge from
s or any descendant of s to a proper ancestor of v.
c. Let

Show how to compute v.low for all vertices v V in O(E) time.

d. Show how to compute all articulation points in O(E) time.
e. Prove that an edge of G is a bridge if and only if it does not lie on any

simple cycle of G.
f. Show how to compute all the bridges of G in O(E) time.
g. Prove that the biconnected components of G partition the nonbridge

edges of G.
h. Give an O(E)-time algorithm to label each edge e of G with a positive

integer e.bcc such that e.bcc = e.bcc if and only if e and e belong to

the same biconnected component.

20-3 Euler tour
An Euler tour of a strongly connected, directed graph G = (V, E) is a
cycle that traverses each edge of G exactly once, although it may visit a

vertex more than once.

a. Show that G has an Euler tour if and only if in-degree(v) = out-
degree(v) for each vertex v V.

b. Describe an O(E)-time algorithm to find an Euler tour of G if one
exists. (Hint: Merge edge-disjoint cycles.)

20-4 Reachability
Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph in which each vertex u V is labeled
with a unique integer L(u) from the set {1, 2, ... , |V|}. For each vertex u
V, let R(u) = {v V : u v} be the set of vertices that are reachable
from u. Define min(u) to be the vertex in R(u) whose label is minimum,
that is, min(u) is the vertex v such that L(v) = min {L(w) : w R(u)}.
Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm that computes min(u) for all vertices u
V.

20-5 Inserting and querying vertices in planar graphs
A planar graph is an undirected graph that can be drawn in the plane
with no edges crossing. Euler proved that every planar graph has |E| < 3
|V|.

Consider the following two operations on a planar graph G:

INSERT(G, v, neighbors) inserts a new vertex v into G, where
neighbors is an array (possibly empty) of vertices that have
already been inserted into G and will become all the neighbors of
v in G when v is inserted.

NEWEST-NEIGHBOR(G, v) returns the neighbor of vertex v
that was most recently inserted into G, or NIL if v has no

neighbors.

Design a data structure that supports these two operations such that

NEWEST-NEIGHBOR takes O(1) worst-case time and INSERT takes
O(1) amortized time. Note that the length of the array neighbors given
to INSERT may vary. (Hint: Use a potential function for the amortized

analysis.)

Chapter notes

Even [137] and Tarjan [429] are excellent references for graph
algorithms.

Breadth-first search was discovered by Moore [334] in the context of
finding paths through mazes. Lee [280] independently discovered the
same algorithm in the context of routing wires on circuit boards.

Hopcroft and Tarjan [226] advocated the use of the adjacency-list
representation over the adjacency-matrix representation for sparse
graphs and were the first to recognize the algorithmic importance of
depth-first search. Depth-first search has been widely used since the
late 1950s, especially in artificial intelligence programs.

Tarjan [426] gave a linear-time algorithm for finding strongly
connected components. The algorithm for strongly connected
components in Section 20.5 is adapted from Aho, Hopcroft, and
Ullman [6], who credit it to S. R. Kosaraju (unpublished) and Sharir
[408]. Dijkstra [117, Chapter 25] also developed an algorithm for
strongly connected components that is based on contracting cycles.
Subsequently, Gabow [163] rediscovered this algorithm. Knuth [259] was
the first to give a linear-time algorithm for topological sorting.

1 We distinguish between gray and black vertices to help us understand how breadth-first
search operates. In fact, as Exercise 20.2-3 shows, we get the same result even if we do not
distinguish between gray and black vertices.

2 Chapters 22 and 23 generalize shortest paths to weighted graphs, in which every edge has a
real-valued weight and the weight of a path is the sum of the weights of its constituent edges.
The graphs considered in the present chapter are unweighted or, equivalently, all edges have
unit weight.

3 It may seem arbitrary that breadth-first search is limited to only one source whereas depthfirst search may search from multiple sources. Although conceptually, breadth-first search
could proceed from multiple sources and depth-first search could be limited to one source, our
approach reflects how the results of these searches are typically used. Breadth-first search
usually serves to find shortest-path distances and the associated predecessor subgraph from a
given source. Depth-first search is often a subroutine in another algorithm, as we'll see later in
this chapter.

21 Minimum Spanning Trees

Electronic circuit designs often need to make the pins of several
components electrically equivalent by wiring them together. To

interconnect a set of n pins, the designer can use an arrangement of n -

1 wires, each connecting two pins. Of all such arrangements, the one
that uses the least amount of wire is usually the most desirable.

To model this wiring problem, use a connected, undirected graph G
= (V, E), where V is the set of pins, E is the set of possible
interconnections between pairs of pins, and for each edge (u, v) E, a
weight w(u, v) specifies the cost (amount of wire needed) to connect u
and v. The goal is to find an acyclic subset T E that connects all of

the vertices and whose total weight

is minimized. Since T is acyclic and connects all of the vertices, it must
form a tree, which we call a spanning tree since it "spans" the graph G.
We call the problem of determining the tree T the minimum-spanningtree problem.1 Figure 21.1 shows an example of a connected graph and

a minimum spanning tree.
This chapter studies two ways to solve the minimum-spanning-tree

problem. Kruskal's algorithm and Prim's algorithm both run in O(E lg
V) time. Prim's algorithm achieves this bound by using a binary heap as

a priority queue. By using Fibonacci heaps instead (see page 478),

Prim's algorithm runs in O(E + V lg V) time. This bound is better than
O(E lg V) whenever |E| grows asymptotically faster than |V|.

Figure 21.1 A minimum spanning tree for a connected graph. The weights on edges are shown,
and the blue edges form a minimum spanning tree. The total weight of the tree shown is 37.

This minimum spanning tree is not unique: removing the edge (b, c) and replacing it with the
edge (a, h) yields another spanning tree with weight 37.

The two algorithms are greedy algorithms, as described in Chapter
15. Each step of a greedy algorithm must make one of several possible
choices. The greedy strategy advocates making the choice that is the
best at the moment. Such a strategy does not generally guarantee that it
always finds globally optimal solutions to problems. For the minimumspanning-tree problem, however, we can prove that certain greedy
strategies do yield a spanning tree with minimum weight. Although you
can read this chapter independently of Chapter 15, the greedy methods
presented here are a classic application of the theoretical notions
introduced there.

Section 21.1 introduces a "generic" minimum-spanning-tree method
that grows a spanning tree by adding one edge at a time. Section 21.2
gives two algorithms that implement the generic method. The first
algorithm, due to Kruskal, is similar to the connected-components
algorithm from Section 19.1. The second, due to Prim, resembles
Dijkstra's shortest-paths algorithm (Section 22.3).

Because a tree is a type of graph, in order to be precise we must
define a tree in terms of not just its edges, but its vertices as well.
Because this chapter focuses on trees in terms of their edges, we'll

implicitly understand that the vertices of a tree T are those that some
edge of T is incident on.