21.1 Growing a minimum spanning tree

The input to the minumum-spanning-tree problem is a connected,

undirected graph G = (V, E) with a weight function w : E . The goal
is to find a minimum spanning tree for G. The two algorithms

considered in this chapter use a greedy approach to the problem,
although they differ in how they apply this approach.

This greedy strategy is captured by the procedure GENERIC-MST
on the facing page, which grows the minimum spanning tree one edge at
a time. The generic method manages a set A of edges, maintaining the
following loop invariant:

Prior to each iteration, A is a subset of some minimum

spanning tree.

GENERIC-MST(G, w)
1 A=Ø

2 while A does not form a spanning tree

3 find an edge (u, v) that is safe for A
4 A = A {(u, v)}
5 return A

Each step determines an edge (u, v) that the procedure can add to A
without violating this invariant, in the sense that A {(u, v)} is also a
subset of a minimum spanning tree. We call such an edge a safe edge for
A, since it can be added safely to A while maintaining the invariant.

This generic algorithm uses the loop invariant as follows:

Initialization: After line 1, the set A trivially satisfies the loop invariant.

Maintenance: The loop in lines 24 maintains the invariant by adding
only safe edges.

Termination: All edges added to A belong to a minimum spanning tree,

and the loop must terminate by the time it has considered all edges.

Therefore, the set A returned in line 5 must be a minimum spanning

tree.

The tricky part is, of course, finding a safe edge in line 3. One must
exist, since when line 3 is executed, the invariant dictates that there is a

spanning tree T such that A T. Within the while loop body, A must be
a proper subset of T, and therefore there must be an edge (u, v) T
such that (u, v) A and (u, v) is safe for A.

The remainder of this section provides a rule (Theorem 21.1) for
recognizing safe edges. The next section describes two algorithms that
use this rule to find safe edges efficiently.

We first need some definitions. Acut (S, V S) of an undirected
graph G = (V, E) is a partition of V. Figure 21.2 illustrates this notion.
We say that an edge (u, v) Ecrosses the cut (S, V S) if one of its
endpoints belongs to S and the other belongs to V S. A cut respects a
set A of edges if no edge in A crosses the cut. An edge is a light edge

crossing a cut if its weight is the minimum of any edge crossing the cut.
There can be more than one light edge crossing a cut in the case of ties.

More generally, we say that an edge is a light edge satisfying a given

property if its weight is the minimum of any edge satisfying the
property.

The following theorem gives the rule for recognizing safe edges.

Theorem 21.1
Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued
weight function w defined on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included
in some minimum spanning tree for G, let (S, V S) be any cut of G that
respects A, and let (u, v) be a light edge crossing (S, V S). Then, edge
(u, v) is safe for A.

Figure 21.2 A cut (S, V S) of the graph from Figure 21.1. Orange vertices belong to the set
S, and tan vertices belong to V S. The edges crossing the cut are those connecting tan
vertices with orange vertices. The edge (d, c) is the unique light edge crossing the cut. Blue
edges form a subset A of the edges. The cut (S, V S) respects A, since no edge of A crosses

the cut.

Proof Let T be a minimum spanning tree that includes A, and assume
that T does not contain the light edge (u, v), since if it does, we are
done. We'll construct another minimum spanning tree T that includes A
{(u, v)} by using a cut-and-paste technique, thereby showing that (u,
v) is a safe edge for A.

The edge (u, v) forms a cycle with the edges on the simple path p
from u to v in T, as Figure 21.3 illustrates. Since u and v are on opposite
sides of the cut (S, V S), at least one edge in T lies on the simple path
p and also crosses the cut. Let (x, y) be any such edge. The edge (x, y) is
not in A, because the cut respects A. Since (x, y) is on the unique simple
path from u to v in T, removing (x, y) breaks T into two components.
Adding (u, v) reconnects them to form a new spanning tree T = (T
{(x, y)}) {(u, v)}.

We next show that T is a minimum spanning tree. Since (u, v) is a
light edge crossing (S, V S) and (x, y) also crosses this cut, w(u, v)
w(x, y). Therefore,

w(T) = w(T) - w(x, y) + w(u, v)

w(T).

But T is a minimum spanning tree, so that w(T) w(T), and thus, T

must be a minimum spanning tree as well.

It remains to show that (u, v) is actually a safe edge for A. We have A
T, since A T and (x, y) A, and thus, A {(u, v)} T.
Consequently, since T is a minimum spanning tree, (u, v) is safe for A.

Theorem 21.1 provides insight into how the GENERIC-MST

method works on a connected graph G = (V, E). As the method
proceeds, the set A is always acyclic, since it is a subset of a minimum

spanning tree and a tree may not contain a cycle. At any point in the

execution, the graph GA = (V, A) is a forest, and each of the connected
components of GA is a tree. (Some of the trees may contain just one
vertex, as is the case, for example, when the method begins: A is empty
and the forest contains |V| trees, one for each vertex.) Moreover, any

safe edge (u, v) for A connects distinct components of GA, since A
{(u, v)} must be acyclic.

Figure 21.3 The proof of Theorem 21.1. Orange vertices belong to S, and tan vertices belong
to V S. Only edges in the minimum spanning tree T are shown, along with edge (u, v), which
does not lie in T. The edges in A are blue, and (u, v) is a light edge crossing the cut (S, V S).
The edge (x, y) is an edge on the unique simple path p from u to v in T. To form a minimum
spanning tree T that contains (u, v), remove the edge (x, y) from T and add the edge (u, v).

The while loop in lines 24 of GENERIC-MST executes |V| 1 times
because it finds one of the |V| 1 edges of a minimum spanning tree in
each iteration. Initially, when A = Ø, there are |V| trees in GA, and each

iteration reduces that number by 1. When the forest contains only a
single tree, the method terminates.

The two algorithms in Section 21.2 use the following corollary to
Theorem 21.1.

Corollary 21.2
Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued
weight function w defined on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included
in some minimum spanning tree for G, and let C = (VC, EC) be a
connected component (tree) in the forest GA = (V, A). If (u, v) is a light
edge connecting C to some other component in GA, then (u, v) is safe
for A.
Proof The cut (VC, V VC) respects A, and (u, v) is a light edge for
this cut. Therefore, (u, v) is safe for A.

Exercises

21.1-1
Let (u, v) be a minimum-weight edge in a connected graph G. Show that
(u, v) belongs to some minimum spanning tree of G.

21.1-2

Professor Sabatier conjectures the following converse of Theorem 21.1.

Let G = (V, E) be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued
weight function w defined on E. Let A be a subset of E that is included
in some minimum spanning tree for G, let (S, V S) be any cut of G that
respects A, and let (u, v) be a safe edge for A crossing (S, V S). Then,
(u, v) is a light edge for the cut. Show that the professor's conjecture is

incorrect by giving a counterexample.

21.1-3
Show that if an edge (u, v) is contained in some minimum spanning tree,

then it is a light edge crossing some cut of the graph.

21.1-4

Give a simple example of a connected graph such that the set of edges

{(u, v) : there exists a cut (S, V S) such that (u, v) is a light edge
crossing (S, V S)} does not form a minimum spanning tree.

21.1-5
Let e be a maximum-weight edge on some cycle of connected graph G =
(V, E). Prove that there is a minimum spanning tree of G = (V, E {e})
that is also a minimum spanning tree of G. That is, there is a minimum
spanning tree of G that does not include e.

21.1-6

Show that a graph has a unique minimum spanning tree if, for every cut
of the graph, there is a unique light edge crossing the cut. Show that the
converse is not true by giving a counterexample.

21.1-7

Argue that if all edge weights of a graph are positive, then any subset of
edges that connects all vertices and has minimum total weight must be a
tree. Give an example to show that the same conclusion does not follow
if we allow some weights to be nonpositive.

21.1-8
Let T be a minimum spanning tree of a graph G, and let L be the sorted
list of the edge weights of T. Show that for any other minimum
spanning tree T of G, the list L is also the sorted list of edge weights of
T.

21.1-9
Let T be a minimum spanning tree of a graph G = (V, E), and let V be a
subset of V. Let T be the subgraph of T induced by V, and let G be the
subgraph of G induced by V. Show that if T is connected, then T is a

minimum spanning tree of G.

21.1-10
Given a graph G and a minimum spanning tree T, suppose that the
weight of one of the edges in T decreases. Show that T is still a
minimum spanning tree for G. More formally, let T be a minimum
spanning tree for G with edge weights given by weight function w.
Choose one edge (x, y) T and a positive number k, and define the
weight function w by

Show that T is a minimum spanning tree for G with edge weights given
by w.

21.1-11
Given a graph G and a minimum spanning tree T, suppose that the
weight of one of the edges not in T decreases. Give an algorithm for

finding the minimum spanning tree in the modified graph.