21.2 The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim

The two minimum-spanning-tree algorithms described in this section
elaborate on the generic method. They each use a specific rule to
determine a safe edge in line 3 of GENERIC-MST. In Kruskal's

algorithm, the set A is a forest whose vertices are all those of the given
graph. The safe edge added to A is always a lowest-weight edge in the

graph that connects two distinct components. In Prim's algorithm, the

set A forms a single tree. The safe edge added to A is always a lowest-

weight edge connecting the tree to a vertex not in the tree. Both
algorithms assume that the input graph is connected and represented
by adjacency lists.

Figure 21.4 The execution of Kruskal's algorithm on the graph from Figure 21.1. Blue edges

belong to the forest A being grown. The algorithm considers each edge in sorted order by

weight. A red arrow points to the edge under consideration at each step of the algorithm. If
the edge joins two distinct trees in the forest, it is added to the forest, thereby merging the two
trees.

Kruskal's algorithm
Kruskal's algorithm finds a safe edge to add to the growing forest by
finding, of all the edges that connect any two trees in the forest, an edge

(u, v) with the lowest weight. Let C1 and C2 denote the two trees that
are connected by (u, v). Since (u, v) must be a light edge connecting C1
to some other tree, Corollary 21.2 implies that (u, v) is a safe edge for
C1. Kruskal's algorithm qualifies as a greedy algorithm because at each

step it adds to the forest an edge with the lowest possible weight.

Figure 21.4, continued Further steps in the execution of Kruskal's algorithm.

Like the algorithm to compute connected components from Section
19.1, the procedure MST-KRUSKAL on the following page uses a
disjoint-set data structure to maintain several disjoint sets of elements.
Each set contains the vertices in one tree of the current forest. The

operation FIND-SET(u) returns a representative element from the set
that contains u. Thus, to determine whether two vertices u and v belong
to the same tree, just test whether FIND-SET(u) equals FIND-SET(v).

To combine trees, Kruskal's algorithm calls the UNION procedure.

Figure 21.4 shows how Kruskal's algorithm works. Lines 13

initialize the set A to the empty set and create |V| trees, one containing

each vertex. The for loop in lines 69 examines edges in order of weight,

from lowest to highest. The loop checks, for each edge (u, v), whether
the endpoints u and v belong to the same tree. If they do, then the edge
(u, v) cannot be added to the forest without creating a cycle, and the

edge is ignored. Otherwise, the two vertices belong to different trees. In

this case, line 8 adds the edge (u, v) to A, and line 9 merges the vertices

in the two trees.

MST-KRUSKAL(G, w)

1A = Ø

2for each vertex v G.V
3 MAKE-SET(v)
4create a single list of the edges in G.E

5sort the list of edges into monotonically increasing order by weight

w

6for each edge (u, v) taken from the sorted list in order

7 if FIND-SET(u) FIND-SET(v)

8 A = A {(u, v)}

9 UNION(u, v)

10return A

The running time of Kruskal's algorithm for a graph G = (V, E)

depends on the specific implementation of the disjoint-set data

structure. Let's assume that it uses the disjoint-set-forest

implementation of Section 19.3 with the union-by-rank and path-

compression heuristics, since that is the asymptotically fastest

implementation known. Initializing the set A in line 1 takes O(1) time,
creating a single list of edges in line 4 takes O(V + E) time (which is
O(E) because G is connected), and the time to sort the edges in line 5 is
O(E lg E). (We'll account for the cost of the |V| MAKE-SET operations

in the for loop of lines 23 in a moment.) The for loop of lines 69

performs O(E) FIND-SET and UNION operations on the disjoint-set
forest. Along with the |V| MAKE-SET operations, these disjoint-set

operations take a total of O((V + E) (V)) time, where is the very

slowly growing function defined in Section 19.4. Because we assume that

G is connected, we have |E| |V| 1, and so the disjoint-set operations
take O(E (V)) time. Moreover, since (|V|) = O(lg V) = O(lg E), the
total running time of Kruskal's algorithm is O(E lg E). Observing that
|E| < |V|2, we have lg |E| = O(lg V), and so we can restate the running
time of Kruskal's algorithm as O(E lg V).

Prim's algorithm

Like Kruskal's algorithm, Prim's algorithm is a special case of the
generic minimum-spanning-tree method from Section 21.1. Prim's
algorithm operates much like Dijkstra's algorithm for finding shortest
paths in a graph, which we'll see in Section 22.3. Prim's algorithm has

the property that the edges in the set A always form a single tree. As

Figure 21.5 shows, the tree starts from an arbitrary root vertex r and

grows until it spans all the vertices in V. Each step adds to the tree A a
light edge that connects A to an isolated vertex--one on which no edge
of A is incident. By Corollary 21.2, this rule adds only edges that are
safe for A. Therefore, when the algorithm terminates, the edges in A

form a minimum spanning tree. This strategy qualifies as greedy since at
each step it adds to the tree an edge that contributes the minimum
amount possible to the tree's weight.

Figure 21.5 The execution of Prim's algorithm on the graph from Figure 21.1. The root vertex

is a. Blue vertices and edges belong to the tree being grown, and tan vertices have yet to be

added to the tree. At each step of the algorithm, the vertices in the tree determine a cut of the
graph, and a light edge crossing the cut is added to the tree. The edge and vertex added to the
tree are highlighted in orange. In the second step (part (c)), for example, the algorithm has a

choice of adding either edge (b, c) or edge (a, h) to the tree since both are light edges crossing

the cut.

In the procedure MST-PRIM below, the connected graph G and the
root r of the minimum spanning tree to be grown are inputs to the
algorithm. In order to efficiently select a new edge to add into tree A,
the algorithm maintains a min-priority queue Q of all vertices that are

not in the tree, based on a key attribute. For each vertex v, the attribute
v.key is the minimum weight of any edge connecting v to a vertex in the
tree, where by convention, v.key = if there is no such edge. The
attribute v. names the parent of v in the tree. The algorithm implicitly
maintains the set A from GENERIC-MST as

A = {(v, v.) : v V {r} Q},

where we interpret the vertices in Q as forming a set. When the
algorithm terminates, the min-priority queue Q is empty, and thus the
minimum spanning tree A for G is

A = {(v, v.) : v V {r}}.

MST-PRIM(G, w, r)

1for each vertex u G.V

2 u.key =

3 u. = NIL

4r.key = 0

5Q = Ø

6for each vertex u G.V

7 INSERT(Q, u)

8while Q Ø

9 u = EXTRACT-MIN(Q) // add u to the tree

10 for each vertex v in// update keys of u's non-tree

G.Adj[u] neighbors

11 if v Q and w(u, v) < v.key

12 v. = u

13 v.key = w(u, v)

14 DECREASE-KEY(Q, v, w(u, v))

Figure 21.5 shows how Prim's algorithm works. Lines 17 set the key

of each vertex to (except for the root r, whose key is set to 0 to make

it the first vertex processed), set the parent of each vertex to NIL, and

insert each vertex into the min-priority queue Q. The algorithm

maintains the following three-part loop invariant:

Prior to each iteration of the while loop of lines 814,

1. A = {(v, v.) : v V {r} Q}.

2. The vertices already placed into the minimum spanning

tree are those in V - Q.

3. For all vertices v Q, if v. NIL, then v.key < and
v.key is the weight of a light edge (v, v.) connecting v to

some vertex already placed into the minimum spanning

tree.

Line 9 identifies a vertex u Q incident on a light edge that crosses the
cut (V Q, Q) (with the exception of the first iteration, in which u = r
due to lines 47). Removing u from the set Q adds it to the set V Q of
vertices in the tree, thus adding the edge (u, u.) to A. The for loop of
lines 1014 updates the key and attributes of every vertex v adjacent to
u but not in the tree, thereby maintaining the third part of the loop
invariant. Whenever line 13 updates v.key, line 14 calls DECREASEKEY to inform the min-priority queue that v's key has changed.

The running time of Prim's algorithm depends on the specific

implementation of the min-priority queue Q. You can implement Q with

a binary min-heap (see Chapter 6), including a way to map between

vertices and their corresponding heap elements. The BUILD-MIN-

HEAP procedure can perform lines 57 in O(V) time. In fact, there is no
need to call BUILD-MIN-HEAP. You can just put the key of r at the

root of the min-heap, and because all other keys are , they can go

anywhere else in the min-heap. The body of the while loop executes |V|
times, and since each EXTRACT-MIN operation takes O(lg V) time,
the total time for all calls to EXTRACT-MIN is O(V lg V). The for loop
in lines 1014 executes O(E) times altogether, since the sum of the
lengths of all adjacency lists is 2 |E|. Within the for loop, the test for
membership in Q in line 11 can take constant time if you keep a bit for
each vertex that indicates whether it belongs to Q and update the bit
when the vertex is removed from Q. Each call to DECREASE-KEY in
line 14 takes O(lg V) time. Thus, the total time for Prim's algorithm is

O(V lg V + E lg V) = O(E lg V), which is asymptotically the same as for

our implementation of Kruskal's algorithm.
You can further improve the asymptotic running time of Prim's

algorithm by implementing the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci

heap (see page 478). If a Fibonacci heap holds |V| elements, an
EXTRACT-MIN operation takes O(lg V) amortized time and each
INSERT and DECREASE-KEY operation takes only O(1) amortized

time. Therefore, by using a Fibonacci heap to implement the min-

priority queue Q, the running time of Prim's algorithm improves to
O(E+V lg V).

Exercises

21.2-1

Kruskal's algorithm can return different spanning trees for the same

input graph G, depending on how it breaks ties when the edges are
sorted. Show that for each minimum spanning tree T of G, there is a
way to sort the edges of G in Kruskal's algorithm so that the algorithm
returns T.

21.2-2
Give a simple implementation of Prim's algorithm that runs in O(V2)
time when the graph G = (V, E) is represented as an adjacency matrix.

21.2-3
For a sparse graph G = (V, E), where |E| = (V), is the implementation

of Prim's algorithm with a Fibonacci heap asymptotically faster than
the binary-heap implementation? What about for a dense graph, where

|E| = (V2)? How must the sizes |E| and |V| be related for the Fibonacci-

heap implementation to be asymptotically faster than the binary-heap
implementation?

21.2-4

Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from

1 to |V|. How fast can you make Kruskal's algorithm run? What if the

edge weights are integers in the range from 1 to W for some constant
W?

21.2-5

Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from

1 to |V|. How fast can you make Prim's algorithm run? What if the edge
weights are integers in the range from 1 to W for some constant W?

21.2-6

Professor Borden proposes a new divide-and-conquer algorithm for
computing minimum spanning trees, which goes as follows. Given a

graph G = (V, E), partition the set V of vertices into two sets V1 and V2
such that |V1| and |V2| differ by at most 1. Let E1 be the set of edges
that are incident only on vertices in V1, and let E2 be the set of edges
that are incident only on vertices in V2. Recursively solve a minimumspanning-tree problem on each of the two subgraphs G1 = (V1, E1) and
G2 = (V2, E2). Finally, select the minimum-weight edge in E that crosses
the cut V1, V2), and use this edge to unite the resulting two minimum

spanning trees into a single spanning tree.
Either argue that the algorithm correctly computes a minimum

spanning tree of G, or provide an example for which the algorithm fails.

21.2-7

Suppose that the edge weights in a graph are uniformly distributed over
the half-open interval [0, 1). Which algorithm, Kruskal's or Prim's, can
you make run faster?

21.2-8
Suppose that a graph G has a minimum spanning tree already

computed. How quickly can you update the minimum spanning tree

upon adding a new vertex and incident edges to G?

Problems

21-1 Second-best minimum spanning tree

Let G = (V, E) be an undirected, connected graph whose weight
function is w : E , and suppose that |E| |V| and all edge weights

are distinct.
We define a second-best minimum spanning tree as follows. Let T be

the set of all spanning trees of G, and let T be a minimum spanning tree
of G. Then a second-best minimum spanning tree is a spanning tree T
such that w(T) = min {w(T) : T T - {T}}.

a. Show that the minimum spanning tree is unique, but that the second-

best minimum spanning tree need not be unique.

b. Let T be the minimum spanning tree of G. Prove that G contains
some edge (u, v) T and some edge (x, y) T such that (T {(u, v)})
{(x, y)} is a second-best minimum spanning tree of G.

c. Now let T be any spanning tree of G and, for any two vertices u, v
V, let max[u, v] denote an edge of maximum weight on the unique
simple path between u and v in T. Describe an O(V2)-time algorithm
that, given T, computes max[u, v] for all u, v V.

d. Give an efficient algorithm to compute the second-best minimum
spanning tree of G.

21-2 Minimum spanning tree in sparse graphs
For a very sparse connected graph G = (V, E), it is possible to further
improve upon the O(E + V lg V) running time of Prim's algorithm with
a Fibonacci heap by preprocessing G to decrease the number of vertices
before running Prim's algorithm. In particular, for each vertex u, choose
the minimum-weight edge (u, v) incident on u, and put (u, v) into the

minimum spanning tree under construction. Then, contract all chosen
edges (see Section B.4). Rather than contracting these edges one at a
time, first identify sets of vertices that are united into the same new
vertex. Then create the graph that would have resulted from
contracting these edges one at a time, but do so by "renaming" edges
according to the sets into which their endpoints were placed. Several
edges from the original graph might be renamed the same as each other.

In such a case, only one edge results, and its weight is the minimum of

the weights of the corresponding original edges.

Initially, set the minimum spanning tree T being constructed to be
empty, and for each edge (u, v) E, initialize the two attributes (u,
v).orig = (u, v) and (u, v).c = w(u, v). Use the orig attribute to reference

the edge from the initial graph that is associated with an edge in the

contracted graph. The c attribute holds the weight of an edge, and as

edges are contracted, it is updated according to the above scheme for

choosing edge weights. The procedure MST-REDUCE on the facing

page takes inputs G and T, and it returns a contracted graph G with
updated attributes orig and c. The procedure also accumulates edges of
G into the minimum spanning tree T.

a. Let T be the set of edges returned by MST-REDUCE, and let A be
the minimum spanning tree of the graph G formed by the call MST-
PRIM(G, c, r), where c is the weight attribute on the edges of G.E
and r is any vertex in G:V. Prove that T {(x, y).orig : (x, y) A} is a
minimum spanning tree of G.

b. Argue that |G.V| |V| /2.

c. Show how to implement MST-REDUCE so that it runs in O(E) time.
(Hint: Use simple data structures.)

d. Suppose that you run k phases of MST-REDUCE, using the output
G produced by one phase as the input G to the next phase and
accumulating edges in T. Argue that the overall running time of the k
phases is O(kE).

e. Suppose that after running k phases of MST-REDUCE, as in part
(d), you run Prim's algorithm by calling MST-PRIM(G, c, r), where
G, with weight attribute c, is returned by the last phase and r is any
vertex in G.V. Show how to pick k so that the overall running time is
O(E lg lg V). Argue that your choice of k minimizes the overall

asymptotic running time.

f. For what values of |E| (in terms of |V|) does Prim's algorithm with

preprocessing asymptotically beat Prim's algorithm without

preprocessing?

MST-REDUCE(G, T)

1for each vertex v G.V

2 v.mark = FALSE

3 MAKE-SET(v)

4for each vertex u G.V

5 if u.mark == FALSE

6 choose v G.Adj[u] such that (u, v).c is minimized

7 UNION(u, v)

8 T = T {(u, v).orig}

9 u.mark = TRUE

10 v.mark = TRUE

11G.V = {FIND-SET(v) : v G.V}

12G.E = Ø

13for each edge (x, y) G.E

14 u = FIND-SET(x)

15 v = FIND-SET(y)

16 if u v

17 if (u, v) G.E

18 G.E = G.E {(u, v)}

19 (u, v).orig = (x, y).orig

20 (u, v).c = (x, y).c

21 elseif (x, y).c < (u, v).c

22 (u, v).orig = (x, y).orig

23 (u, v).c = (x, y).c

24construct adjacency lists G.Adj for G

25return G and T

21-3 Alternative minimum-spanning-tree algorithms

Consider the three algorithms MAYBE-MST-A, MAYBE-MST-B, and

MAYBE-MST-C on the next page. Each one takes a connected graph

and a weight function as input and returns a set of edges T. For each
algorithm, either prove that T is a minimum spanning tree or prove that
T is not necessarily a minimum spanning tree. Also describe the most

efficient implementation of each algorithm, regardless of whether it
computes a minimum spanning tree.

21-4 Bottleneck spanning tree
A bottleneck spanning tree T of an undirected graph G is a spanning
tree of G whose largest edge weight is minimum over all spanning trees
of G. The value of the bottleneck spanning tree is the weight of the
maximum-weight edge in T.

MAYBE-MST-A(G, w)

1 sort the edges into monotonically decreasing order of edge weights

w

2 T=E

3 for each edge e, taken in monotonically decreasing order by weight

4 if T {e} is a connected graph

5 T = T {e}

6 return T

MAYBE-MST-B(G, w)

1 T=Ø

2 for each edge e, taken in arbitrary order

3 if T {e} has no cycles

4 T = T {e}

5 return T

MAYBE-MST-C(G, w)

1 T=Ø

2 for each edge e, taken in arbitrary order

3 T = T {e}

4 if T has a cycle c

5 let e be a maximum-weight edge on c

6 T = T {e}

7 return T

a. Argue that a minimum spanning tree is a bottleneck spanning tree.

Part (a) shows that finding a bottleneck spanning tree is no harder than
finding a minimum spanning tree. In the remaining parts, you will show
how to find a bottleneck spanning tree in linear time.

b. Give a linear-time algorithm that, given a graph G and an integer b,

determines whether the value of the bottleneck spanning tree is at

most b.

c. Use your algorithm for part (b) as a subroutine in a linear-time
algorithm for the bottleneck-spanning-tree problem. (Hint: You might

want to use a subroutine that contracts sets of edges, as in the MST-
REDUCE procedure described in Problem 21-2.)

Chapter notes

Tarjan [429] surveys the minimum-spanning-tree problem and provides
excellent advanced material. Graham and Hell [198] compiled a history
of the minimum-spanning-tree problem.

Tarjan attributes the first minimum-spanning-tree algorithm to a
1926 paper by O. Borvka. Borvka's algorithm consists of running

O(lg V) iterations of the procedure MST-REDUCE described in

Problem 21-2. Kruskal's algorithm was reported by Kruskal [272] in
1956. The algorithm commonly known as Prim's algorithm was indeed
invented by Prim [367], but it was also invented earlier by V. Jarník in
1930.

When |E| = (V lg V), Prim's algorithm, implemented with a
Fibonacci heap, runs in O(E) time. For sparser graphs, using a

combination of the ideas from Prim's algorithm, Kruskal's algorithm,
and Borvka's algorithm, together with advanced data structures,

Fredman and Tarjan [156] give an algorithm that runs in O(E lg* V)

time. Gabow, Galil, Spencer, and Tarjan [165] improved this algorithm to

run in O(E lg lg* V) time. Chazelle [83] gives an algorithm that runs in
O(E (E, V)) time, where (E, V) is the functional inverse of

Ackermann's function. (See the chapter notes for Chapter 19 for a brief
discussion of Ackermann's function and its inverse.) Unlike previous
minimum-spanning-tree algorithms, Chazelle's algorithm does not

follow the greedy method. Pettie and Ramachandran [356] give an
algorithm based on precomputed "MST decision trees" that also runs

in O(E (E, V)) time.
A related problem is spanning-tree verification: given a graph G = (V,

E) and a tree T E, determine whether T is a minimum spanning tree
of G. King [254] gives a linear-time algorithm to verify a spanning tree,

building on earlier work of Komlós [269] and Dixon, Rauch, and Tarjan
[120].

The above algorithms are all deterministic and fall into the
comparison-based model described in Chapter 8. Karger, Klein, and
Tarjan [243] give a randomized minimum-spanning-tree algorithm that

runs in O(V + E) expected time. This algorithm uses recursion in a

manner similar to the linear-time selection algorithm in Section 9.3: a

recursive call on an auxiliary problem identifies a subset of the edges E

that cannot be in any minimum spanning tree. Another recursive call on

E E then finds the minimum spanning tree. The algorithm also uses

ideas from Borvka's algorithm and King's algorithm for spanning-tree
verification.

Fredman and Willard [158] showed how to find a minimum spanning

tree in O(V + E) time using a deterministic algorithm that is not
comparison based. Their algorithm assumes that the data are b-bit
integers and that the computer memory consists of addressable b-bit

words.

1 The phrase "minimum spanning tree" is a shortened form of the phrase "minimum-weight

spanning tree." There is no point in minimizing the number of edges in T, since all spanning
trees have exactly |V| - 1 edges by Theorem B.2 on page 1169.

22 Single-Source Shortest Paths

Suppose that you need to drive from Oceanside, New York, to
Oceanside, California, by the shortest possible route. Your GPS
contains information about the entire road network of the United
States, including the road distance between each pair of adjacent
intersections. How can your GPS determine this shortest route?
One possible way is to enumerate all the routes from Oceanside, New
York, to Oceanside, California, add up the distances on each route, and
select the shortest. But even disallowing routes that contain cycles, your
GPS would need to examine an enormous number of possibilities, most
of which are simply not worth considering. For example, a route that
passes through Miami, Florida, is a poor choice, because Miami is
several hundred miles out of the way.

This chapter and Chapter 23 show how to solve such problems

efficiently. The input to a shortest-paths problem is a weighted, directed
graph G = (V, E), with a weight function w : E mapping edges to
real-valued weights. The weight w(p) of path p = v0, v1, ... , vk is the

sum of the weights of its constituent edges:

We define the shortest-path weight (u, v) from u to v by

A shortest path from vertex u to vertex v is then defined as any path p
with weight w(p) = (u, v).

In the example of going from Oceanside, New York, to Oceanside,
California, your GPS models the road network as a graph: vertices
represent intersections, edges represent road segments between
intersections, and edge weights represent road distances. The goal is to
find a shortest path from a given intersection in Oceanside, New York
(say, Brower Avenue and Skillman Avenue) to a given intersection in
Oceanside, California (say, Topeka Street and South Horne Street).

Edge weights can represent metrics other than distances, such as
time, cost, penalties, loss, or any other quantity that accumulates
linearly along a path and that you want to minimize.

The breadth-first-search algorithm from Section 20.2 is a shortestpaths algorithm that works on unweighted graphs, that is, graphs in
which each edge has unit weight. Because many of the concepts from
breadth-first search arise in the study of shortest paths in weighted
graphs, you might want to review Section 20.2 before proceeding.

Variants

This chapter focuses on the single-source shortest-paths problem: given
a graph G = (V, E), find a shortest path from a given source vertex s V
to every vertex v V. The algorithm for the single-source problem can

solve many other problems, including the following variants.

Single-destination shortest-paths problem: Find a shortest path to a

given destination vertex t from each vertex v. By reversing the

direction of each edge in the graph, you can reduce this problem to a
single-source problem.

Single-pair shortest-path problem: Find a shortest path from u to v for
given vertices u and v. If you solve the single-source problem with
source vertex u, you solve this problem also. Moreover, all known

algorithms for this problem have the same worst-case asymptotic
running time as the best single-source algorithms.

All-pairs shortest-paths problem: Find a shortest path from u to v for
every pair of vertices u and v. Although you can solve this problem by

running a single-source algorithm once from each vertex, you often
can solve it faster. Additionally, its structure is interesting in its own
right. Chapter 23 addresses the all-pairs problem in detail.

Optimal substructure of a shortest path

Shortest-paths algorithms typically rely on the property that a shortest
path between two vertices contains other shortest paths within it. (The
Edmonds-Karp maximum-flow algorithm in Chapter 24 also relies on
this property.) Recall that optimal substructure is one of the key
indicators that dynamic programming (Chapter 14) and the greedy
method (Chapter 15) might apply. Dijkstra's algorithm, which we shall
see in Section 22.3, is a greedy algorithm, and the Floyd-Warshall
algorithm, which finds a shortest path between every pair of vertices
(see Section 23.2), is a dynamic-programming algorithm. The following
lemma states the optimal-substructure property of shortest paths more
precisely.

Lemma 22.1 (Subpaths of shortest paths are shortest paths)
Given a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with weight function w : E

let p = v0, v1, ... , vk be a shortest path from vertex v0 to vertex

vk and, for any i and j such that 0 i j k, let pij = vi, vi+1, ... , vj be
the subpath of p from vertex vi to vertex vj. Then, pij is a shortest path
from vi to vj.

Proof Decompose path p into , so that w(p) = w(p0i) +

w(pij) + w(pjk). Now, assume that there is a path from vi to vj with

weight . Then, is a path from v0 to vk whose

weight is less than w(p), which contradicts the

assumption that p is a shortest path from v0 to vk.

Negative-weight edges

Some instances of the single-source shortest-paths problem may include

edges whose weights are negative. If the graph G = (V, E) contains no
negative-weight cycles reachable from the source s, then for all v V,
the shortest-path weight (s, v) remains well defined, even if it has a

negative value. If the graph contains a negative-weight cycle reachable

from s, however, shortest-path weights are not well defined. No path
from s to a vertex on the cycle can be a shortest path--you can always

find a path with lower weight by following the proposed "shortest" path

and then traversing the negative-weight cycle. If there is a negative-

weight cycle on some path from s to v, we define (s, v) = -.

Figure 22.1 illustrates the effect of negative weights and negative-

weight cycles on shortest-path weights. Because there is only one path

from s to a (the path s, a), we have (s, a) = w(s, a) = 3. Similarly, there
is only one path from s to b, and so (s, b) = w(s, a) + w(a, b) = 3 + (-4)
= -1. There are infinitely many paths from s to c: s, c, s, c, d, c, s, c,
d, c, d, c, and so on. Because the cycle c, d, c has weight 6 + (-3) = 3
> 0, the shortest path from s to c is s, c, with weight (s, c) = w(s, c) =
5, and the shortest path from s to d is s, c, d, with weight (s, d) = w(s,
c) + w(c, d) = 11. Analogously, there are infinitely many paths from s to
e: s, e, s, e, f, e, s, e, f, e, f, e, and so on. Because the cycle e, f, e
has weight 3 + (-6) = -3 < 0, however, there is no shortest path from s
to e. By traversing the negative-weight cycle e, f, e arbitrarily many
times, you can find paths from s to e with arbitrarily large negative
weights, and so (s, e) = -. Similarly, (s, f) = -. Because g is
reachable from f, you can also find paths with arbitrarily large negative
weights from s to g, and so (s, g) = -. Vertices h, i, and j also form a
negative-weight cycle. They are not reachable from s, however, and so
(s, h) = (s, i) = (s, j) = .

Figure 22.1 Negative edge weights in a directed graph. The shortest-path weight from source s
appears within each vertex. Because vertices e and f form a negative-weight cycle reachable
from s, they have shortest-path weights of -. Because vertex g is reachable from a vertex
whose shortest-path weight is -, it, too, has a shortest-path weight of -. Vertices such as h,
i, and j are not reachable from s, and so their shortest-path weights are , even though they lie

on a negative-weight cycle.

Some shortest-paths algorithms, such as Dijkstra's algorithm,
assume that all edge weights in the input graph are nonnegative, as in a
road network. Others, such as the Bellman-Ford algorithm, allow
negative-weight edges in the input graph and produce a correct answer
as long as no negative-weight cycles are reachable from the source.
Typically, if there is such a negative-weight cycle, the algorithm can
detect and report its existence.

Cycles

Can a shortest path contain a cycle? As we have just seen, it cannot
contain a negative-weight cycle. Nor can it contain a positive-weight
cycle, since removing the cycle from the path produces a path with the
same source and destination vertices and a lower path weight. That is, if

p = v0, v1, ... , vk is a path and c = vi, vi+1, ... , vj is a positiveweight cycle on this path (so that vi = vj and w(c) > 0), then the path p
= v0, v1, ... , vi, vj+1, vj+2, ... , vk has weight w(p) = w(p) - w(c) <
w(p), and so p cannot be a shortest path from v0 to vk.

That leaves only 0-weight cycles. You can remove a 0-weight cycle
from any path to produce another path whose weight is the same. Thus,

if there is a shortest path from a source vertex s to a destination vertex
v that contains a 0-weight cycle, then there is another shortest path

from s to v without this cycle. As long as a shortest path has 0-weight

cycles, you can repeatedly remove these cycles from the path until you
have a shortest path that is cycle-free. Therefore, without loss of
generality, assume that shortest paths have no cycles, that is, they are

simple paths. Since any acyclic path in a graph G = (V, E) contains at
most |V| distinct vertices, it also contains at most |V| - 1 edges. Assume,
therefore, that any shortest path contains at most |V| - 1 edges.

Representing shortest paths

It is usually not enough to compute only shortest-path weights. Most
applications of shortest paths need to know the vertices on shortest
paths as well. For example, if your GPS told you the distance to your
destination but not how to get there, it would not be terribly useful. We
represent shortest paths similarly to how we represented breadth-first

trees in Section 20.2. Given a graph G = (V, E), maintain for each
vertex v V a predecessor v. that is either another vertex or NIL. The

shortest-paths algorithms in this chapter set the attributes so that the

chain of predecessors originating at a vertex v runs backward along a
shortest path from s to v. Thus, given a vertex v for which v. NIL, the
procedure PRINT-PATH(G, s, v) from Section 20.2 prints a shortest
path from s to v.

In the midst of executing a shortest-paths algorithm, however, the

values might not indicate shortest paths. The predecessor subgraph G =
(V, E) induced by the values is defined the same for single-source

shortest paths as for breadth-first search in equations (20.2) and (20.3)
on page 561:

V = {v V : v. NIL} {s},

E = {(v., v) E : v V - {s}}.

We'll prove that the values produced by the algorithms in this

chapter have the property that at termination G is a "shortest-paths

tree"--informally, a rooted tree containing a shortest path from the

source s to every vertex that is reachable from s. A shortest-paths tree is

like the breadth-first tree from Section 20.2, but it contains shortest

paths from the source defined in terms of edge weights instead of

numbers of edges. To be precise, let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed
graph with weight function w : E , and assume that G contains no
negative-weight cycles reachable from the source vertex s V, so that
shortest paths are well defined. Ashortest-paths tree rooted at s is a
directed subgraph G = (V, E), where V V and E E, such that

1. V is the set of vertices reachable from s in G,
2. G forms a rooted tree with root s, and
3. for all v V, the unique simple path from s to v in G is a

shortest path from s to v in G.

Figure 22.2 (a) A weighted, directed graph with shortest-path weights from source s. (b) The
blue edges form a shortest-paths tree rooted at the source s. (c) Another shortest-paths tree

with the same root.

Shortest paths are not necessarily unique, and neither are shortestpaths trees. For example, Figure 22.2 shows a weighted, directed graph
and two shortest-paths trees with the same root.

Relaxation

The algorithms in this chapter use the technique of relaxation. For each
vertex v V, the single-source shortest paths algorithms maintain an
attribute v.d, which is an upper bound on the weight of a shortest path
from source s to v. We call v.d a shortest-path estimate. To initialize the
shortest-path estimates and predecessors, call the (V)-time procedure
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE. After initialization, we have v. =
NIL for all v V, s.d = 0 and v.d = for v V - {s}.

INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s)
1 for each vertex v G.V
2 v.d =
3 v. = NIL
4 s.d = 0

The process of relaxing an edge (u, v) consists of testing whether
going through vertex u improves the shortest path to vertex v found so
far and, if so, updating v.d and v.. A relaxation step might decrease the
value of the shortest-path estimate v.d and update v's predecessor
attribute v.. The RELAX procedure on the following page performs a
relaxation step on edge (u, v) in O(1) time. Figure 22.3 shows two

examples of relaxing an edge, one in which a shortest-path estimate
decreases and one in which no estimate changes.

Figure 22.3 Relaxing an edge (u, v) with weight w(u, v) = 2. The shortest-path estimate of each
vertex appears within the vertex. (a) Because v.d > u.d + w(u, v) prior to relaxation, the value
of v.d decreases. (b) Since we have v.d u.d + w(u, v) before relaxing the edge, the relaxation
step leaves v.d unchanged.

RELAX(u, v, w)
1 if v.d > u.d + w(u, v)
2 v.d = u.d + w(u, v)
3 v. = u

Each algorithm in this chapter calls INITIALIZE-SINGLESOURCE and then repeatedly relaxes edges.1 Moreover, relaxation is
the only means by which shortest-path estimates and predecessors

change. The algorithms in this chapter differ in how many times they
relax each edge and the order in which they relax edges. Dijkstra's
algorithm and the shortest-paths algorithm for directed acyclic graphs
relax each edge exactly once. The Bellman-Ford algorithm relaxes each

edge |V| - 1 times.

Properties of shortest paths and relaxation

To prove the algorithms in this chapter correct, we'll appeal to several
properties of shortest paths and relaxation. We state these properties
here, and Section 22.5 proves them formally. For your reference, each
property stated here includes the appropriate lemma or corollary
number from Section 22.5. The latter five of these properties, which
refer to shortest-path estimates or the predecessor subgraph, implicitly
assume that the graph is initialized with a call to INITIALIZE-

SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s) and that the only way that shortest-path

estimates and the predecessor subgraph change are by some sequence
of relaxation steps.

Triangle inequality (Lemma 22.10)

For any edge (u, v) E, we have (s, v) (s, u) + w(u, v).

Upper-bound property (Lemma 22.11)

We always have v.d (s, v) for all vertices v V, and once v.d
achieves the value (s, v), it never changes.

No-path property (Corollary 22.12)

If there is no path from s to v, then we always have v.d = (s, v) = .

Convergence property (Lemma 22.14)

If s u v is a shortest path in G for some u, v V, and if u.d =
(s, u) at any time prior to relaxing edge (u, v), then v.d = (s, v) at

all times afterward.

Path-relaxation property (Lemma 22.15)

If p = v0, v1, ... , vk is a shortest path from s = v0 to vk, and the
edges of p are relaxed in the order (v0, v1), (v1, v2), ... , (vk-1, vk),
then vk.d = (s, vk). This property holds regardless of any other

relaxation steps that occur, even if they are intermixed with

relaxations of the edges of p.

Predecessor-subgraph property (Lemma 22.17)

Once v.d = (s, v) for all v V, the predecessor subgraph is a
shortest-paths tree rooted at s.

Chapter outline

Section 22.1 presents the Bellman-Ford algorithm, which solves the
single-source shortest-paths problem in the general case in which edges
can have negative weight. The Bellman-Ford algorithm is remarkably
simple, and it has the further benefit of detecting whether a negativeweight cycle is reachable from the source. Section 22.2 gives a lineartime algorithm for computing shortest paths from a single source in a
directed acyclic graph. Section 22.3 covers Dijkstra's algorithm, which
has a lower running time than the Bellman-Ford algorithm but requires
the edge weights to be nonnegative. Section 22.4 shows how to use the
Bellman-Ford algorithm to solve a special case of linear programming.
Finally, Section 22.5 proves the properties of shortest paths and
relaxation stated above.

This chapter does arithmetic with infinities, and so we need some
conventions for when or - appears in an arithmetic expression. We

assume that for any real number a -, we have a + = + a = .

Also, to make our proofs hold in the presence of negative-weight cycles,

we assume that for any real number a , we have a + (-) = (-) + a

= -.

All algorithms in this chapter assume that the directed graph G is

stored in the adjacency-list representation. Additionally, stored with
each edge is its weight, so that as each algorithm traverses an adjacency

list, it can find edge weights in O(1) time per edge.