22.1 The Bellman-Ford algorithm

The Bellman-Ford algorithm solves the single-source shortest-paths

problem in the general case in which edge weights may be negative.

Given a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with source vertex s and
weight function w : E , the Bellman-Ford algorithm returns a

boolean value indicating whether there is a negative-weight cycle that is

reachable from the source. If there is such a cycle, the algorithm

indicates that no solution exists. If there is no such cycle, the algorithm

produces the shortest paths and their weights.

The procedure BELLMAN-FORD relaxes edges, progressively

decreasing an estimate v.d on the weight of a shortest path from the
source s to each vertex v V until it achieves the actual shortest-path
weight (s, v). The algorithm returns TRUE if and only if the graph

contains no negative-weight cycles that are reachable from the source.

BELLMAN-FORD(G, w, s)

1 INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s)

2 for i = 1 to |G.V| - 1

3 for each edge (u, v) G.E

4 RELAX(u, v, w)

5 for each edge (u, v) = G.E

6 if v.d > u.d + w(u, v)

7 return FALSE

8 return TRUE

Figure 22.4 shows the execution of the Bellman-Ford algorithm on a

graph with 5 vertices. After initializing the d and values of all vertices
in line 1, the algorithm makes |V| - 1 passes over the edges of the graph.

Each pass is one iteration of the for loop of lines 24 and consists of

relaxing each edge of the graph once. Figures 22.4(b)(e) show the state

of the algorithm after each of the four passes over the edges. After

making |V| - 1 passes, lines 58 check for a negative-weight cycle and

return the appropriate boolean value. (We'll see a little later why this

check works.)

Figure 22.4 The execution of the Bellman-Ford algorithm. The source is vertex s. The d values
appear within the vertices, and blue edges indicate predecessor values: if edge (u, v) is blue,
then v. = u. In this particular example, each pass relaxes the edges in the order (t, x), (t, y), (t,
z), (x, t), (y, x), (y, z), (z, x), (z, s), (s, t), (s, y). (a) The situation just before the first pass over

the edges. (b)(e) The situation after each successive pass over the edges. Vertices whose
shortest-path estimates and predecessors have changed due to a pass are highlighted in

orange. The d and values in part (e) are the final values. The Bellman-Ford algorithm returns

TRUE in this example.

The Bellman-Ford algorithm runs in O(V2 + VE) time when the

graph is represented by adjacency lists, since the initialization in line 1

takes (V) time, each of the |V| - 1 passes over the edges in lines 24
takes (V + E) time (examining |V| adjacency lists to find the |E| edges),
and the for loop of lines 57 takes O(V + E) time. Fewer than |V| - 1

passes over the edges sometimes suffice (see Exercise 22.1-3), which is

why we say O(V2+VE) time, rather than (V2+VE) time. In the
frequent case where |E| = (V), we can express this running time as
O(VE). Exercise 22.1-5 asks you to make the Bellman-Ford algorithm
run in O(VE) time even when |E| = o(V).

To prove the correctness of the Bellman-Ford algorithm, we start by

showing that if there are no negative-weight cycles, the algorithm

computes correct shortest-path weights for all vertices reachable from

the source.

Lemma 22.2
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s and
weight function w : E , and assume that G contains no negativeweight cycles that are reachable from s. Then, after the |V| - 1 iterations
of the for loop of lines 24 of BELLMAN-FORD, v.d = (s, v) for all
vertices v that are reachable from s.

Proof We prove the lemma by appealing to the path-relaxation
property. Consider any vertex v that is reachable from s, and let p = v0,
v1, ... , vk, where v0 = s and vk = v, be any shortest path from s to v.
Because shortest paths are simple, p has at most |V| - 1 edges, and so k
|V| - 1. Each of the |V| - 1 iterations of the for loop of lines 24
relaxes all |E| edges. Among the edges relaxed in the ith iteration, for i =
1, 2, ... , k, is (vi-1, vi). By the path-relaxation property, therefore, v.d =
vk.d = (s, vk) = (s, v).

Corollary 22.3
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s and
weight function w : E . Then, for each vertex v V, there is a path
from s to v if and only if BELLMAN-FORD terminates with v.d <
when it is run on G.

Proof The proof is left as Exercise 22.1-2.

Theorem 22.4 (Correctness of the Bellman-Ford algorithm)
Let BELLMAN-FORD be run on a weighted, directed graph G = (V,
E) with source vertex s and weight function w : E . If G contains no
negative-weight cycles that are reachable from s, then the algorithm
returns TRUE, v.d = (s, v) for all vertices v V, and the predecessor
subgraph G is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s. If G does contain a
negative-weight cycle reachable from s, then the algorithm returns

FALSE.

Proof Suppose that graph G contains no negative-weight cycles that

are reachable from the source s. We first prove the claim that at

termination, v.d = (s, v) for all vertices v V. If vertex v is reachable
from s, then Lemma 22.2 proves this claim. If v is not reachable from s,

then the claim follows from the no-path property. Thus, the claim is
proven. The predecessor-subgraph property, along with the claim,

implies that G is a shortest-paths tree. Now we use the claim to show
that BELLMAN-FORD returns TRUE. At termination, for all edges (u,
v) E we have

v.d = (s, v)
(s, u) + w(u, v) (by the triangle inequality)
= u.d + w(u, v),

and so none of the tests in line 6 causes BELLMAN-FORD to return
FALSE. Therefore, it returns TRUE.

Now, suppose that graph G contains a negative-weight cycle
reachable from the source s. Let this cycle be c = v0, v1, ... , vk, where
v0 = vk, in which case we have

Assume for the purpose of contradiction that the Bellman-Ford

algorithm returns TRUE. Thus, vi.d vi-1.d + w(vi-1, vi) for i = 1, 2, ...
, k. Summing the inequalities around cycle c gives

Since v0 = vk, each vertex in c appears exactly once in each of the

summations and , and so

Moreover, by Corollary 22.3, vi.d is finite for i = 1, 2, ... , k. Thus,

which contradicts inequality (22.1). We conclude that the Bellman-Ford

algorithm returns TRUE if graph G contains no negative-weight cycles

reachable from the source, and FALSE otherwise.

Exercises

22.1-1

Run the Bellman-Ford algorithm on the directed graph of Figure 22.4,

using vertex z as the source. In each pass, relax edges in the same order
as in the figure, and show the d and values after each pass. Now,
change the weight of edge (z, x) to 4 and run the algorithm again, using
s as the source.

22.1-2

Prove Corollary 22.3.

22.1-3
Given a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with no negative-weight
cycles, let m be the maximum over all vertices v V of the minimum
number of edges in a shortest path from the source s to v. (Here, the

shortest path is by weight, not the number of edges.) Suggest a simple

change to the Bellman-Ford algorithm that allows it to terminate in m +
1 passes, even if m is not known in advance.

22.1-4
Modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm so that it sets v.d to - for all
vertices v for which there is a negative-weight cycle on some path from
the source to v.

22.1-5

Suppose that the graph given as input to the Bellman-Ford algorithm is

represented with a list of |E| edges, where each edge indicates the

vertices it leaves and enters, along with its weight. Argue that the

Bellman-Ford algorithm runs in O(VE) time without the constraint that
|E| = (V). Modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm so that it runs in O(VE)

time in all cases when the input graph is represented with adjacency
lists.

22.1-6
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
. Give an O(VE)-time algorithm to find, for all vertices v V, the
value *(v) = min {(u, v) : u V}.

22.1-7
Suppose that a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) contains a negative-

weight cycle. Give an efficient algorithm to list the vertices of one such
cycle. Prove that your algorithm is correct.