22.3 Dijkstra's algorithm

Dijkstra's algorithm solves the single-source shortest-paths problem on

a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E), but it requires nonnegative
weights on all edges: w(u, v) 0 for each edge (u, v) E. As we shall see,

with a good implementation, the running time of Dijkstra's algorithm is
lower than that of the Bellman-Ford algorithm.

You can think of Dijkstra's algorithm as generalizing breadth-first
search to weighted graphs. A wave emanates from the source, and the
first time that a wave arrives at a vertex, a new wave emanates from that
vertex. Whereas breadth-first search operates as if each wave takes unit
time to traverse an edge, in a weighted graph, the time for a wave to
traverse an edge is given by the edge's weight. Because a shortest path
in a weighted graph might not have the fewest edges, a simple, first-in,
first-out queue won't suffice for choosing the next vertex from which to
send out a wave.

Instead, Dijkstra's algorithm maintains a set S of vertices whose
final shortest-path weights from the source s have already been
determined. The algorithm repeatedly selects the vertex u V S with
the minimum shortest-path estimate, adds u into S, and relaxes all edges
leaving u. The procedure DIJKSTRA replaces the first-in, first-out

queue of breadth-first search by a min-priority queue Q of vertices,
keyed by their d values.

DIJKSTRA(G, w, s)

1INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s)

2S = Ø

3Q = Ø

4for each vertex u G.V

5 INSERT(Q, u)

6while Q Ø

7 u = EXTRACT-MIN(Q)

8 S = S {u}

9 for each vertex v in G.Adj[u]

10 RELAX(u, v, w)

11 if the call of RELAX decreased v.d

12 DECREASE-KEY(Q, v, v.d)

Dijkstra's algorithm relaxes edges as shown in Figure 22.6. Line 1

initializes the d and values in the usual way, and line 2 initializes the
set S to the empty set. The algorithm maintains the invariant that Q =
V - S at the start of each iteration of the while loop of lines 612. Lines
35 initialize the min-priority queue Q to contain all the vertices in V.
Since S = Ø at that time, the invariant is true upon first reaching line 6.
Each time through the while loop of lines 612, line 7 extracts a vertex u
from Q = V - S and line 8 adds it to set S, thereby maintaining the
invariant. (The first time through this loop, u = s.) Vertex u, therefore,
has the smallest shortest-path estimate of any vertex in V - S. Then,
lines 912 relax each edge (u, v) leaving u, thus updating the estimate v.d
and the predecessor v. if the shortest path to v found so far improves
by going through u. Whenever a relaxation step changes the d and

values, the call to DECREASE-KEY in line 12 updates the min-priority

queue. The algorithm never inserts vertices into Q after the for loop of
lines 45, and each vertex is extracted from Q and added to S exactly
once, so that the while loop of lines 612 iterates exactly |V| times.

Figure 22.6 The execution of Dijkstra's algorithm. The source s is the leftmost vertex. The

shortest-path estimates appear within the vertices, and blue edges indicate predecessor values.

Blue vertices belong to the set S, and tan vertices are in the min-priority queue Q = V - S. (a)

The situation just before the first iteration of the while loop of lines 612. (b)(f) The situation
after each successive iteration of the while loop. In each part, the vertex highlighted in orange

was chosen as vertex u in line 7, and each edge highlighted in orange caused a d value and a
predecessor to change when the edge was relaxed. The d values and predecessors shown in

part (f) are the final values.

Because Dijkstra's algorithm always chooses the "lightest" or

"closest" vertex in V - S to add to set S, you can think of it as using a

greedy strategy. Chapter 15 explains greedy strategies in detail, but you
need not have read that chapter to understand Dijkstra's algorithm.
Greedy strategies do not always yield optimal results in general, but as
the following theorem and its corollary show, Dijkstra's algorithm does

indeed compute shortest paths. The key is to show that u.d = (s, u)
each time it adds a vertex u to set S.

Figure 22.7 The proof of Theorem 22.6. Vertex u is selected to be added into set S in line 7 of
DIJKSTRA. Vertex y is the first vertex on a shortest path from the source s to vertex u that is
not in set S, and x S is y's predecessor on that shortest path. The subpath from y to u may or
may not re-enter set S.

Theorem 22.6 (Correctness of Dijkstra's algorithm)
Dijkstra's algorithm, run on a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with
nonnegative weight function w and source vertex s, terminates with u.d
= (s, u) for all vertices u V.

Proof We will show that at the start of each iteration of the while loop
of lines 612, we have v.d = (s, v) for all v S. The algorithm
terminates when S = V, so that v.d = (s, v) for all v V.

The proof is by induction on the number of iterations of the while

loop, which equals |S| at the start of each iteration. There are two bases:
for |S| = 0, so that S = Ø and the claim is trivially true, and for |S| = 1,
so that S = {s} and s.d = (s, s) = 0.

For the inductive step, the inductive hypothesis is that v.d = (s, v)
for all v S. The algorithm extracts vertex u from V - S. Because the
algorithm adds u into S, we need to show that u.d = (s, u) at that time.
If there is no path from s to u, then we are done, by the no-path
property. If there is a path from s to u, then, as Figure 22.7 shows, let y
be the first vertex on a shortest path from s to u that is not in S, and let
x S be the predecessor of y on that shortest path. (We could have y =
u or x = s.) Because y appears no later than u on the shortest path and
all edge weights are nonnegative, we have (s, y) (s, u). Because the
call of EXTRACT-MIN in line 7 returned u as having the minimum d
value in V - S, we also have u.d y.d, and the upper-bound property
gives (s, u) u.d.

Since x S, the inductive hypothesis implies that x.d = (s, x).
During the iteration of the while loop that added x into S, edge (x, y)
was relaxed. By the convergence property, y.d received the value of (s,
y) at that time. Thus, we have

(s, y) (s, u) u.d y.d and y.d = (s, y),

so that

(s, y) = (s, u) = u.d = y.d.

Hence, u.d = (s, u), and by the upper-bound property, this value never

changes again.

Corollary 22.7
After Dijkstra's algorithm is run on a weighted, directed graph G = (V,
E) with nonnegative weight function w and source vertex s, the
predecessor subgraph G is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s.

Proof Immediate from Theorem 22.6 and the predecessor-subgraph

property.

Analysis

How fast is Dijkstra's algorithm? It maintains the min-priority queue Q

by calling three priority-queue operations: INSERT (in line 5),
EXTRACT-MIN (in line 7), and DECREASE-KEY (in line 12). The
algorithm calls both INSERT and EXTRACT-MIN once per vertex.

Because each vertex u V is added to set S exactly once, each edge in
the adjacency list Adj[u] is examined in the for loop of lines 912 exactly

once during the course of the algorithm. Since the total number of

edges in all the adjacency lists is |E|, this for loop iterates a total of |E|
times, and thus the algorithm calls DECREASE-KEY at most |E| times

overall. (Observe once again that we are using aggregate analysis.)
Just as in Prim's algorithm, the running time of Dijkstra's algorithm

depends on the specific implementation of the min-priority queue Q. A

simple implementation takes advantage of the vertices being numbered

1 to |V|: simply store v.d in the vth entry of an array. Each INSERT and
DECREASE-KEY operation takes O(1) time, and each EXTRACTMIN operation takes O(V) time (since it has to search through the
entire array), for a total time of O(V2 + E) = O(V2).

If the graph is sufficiently sparse--in particular, E = o(V2/lg V)--you

can improve the running time by implementing the min-priority queue

with a binary min-heap that includes a way to map between vertices and

their corresponding heap elements. Each EXTRACT-MIN operation

then takes O(lg V) time. As before, there are |V| such operations. The
time to build the binary min-heap is O(V). (As noted in Section 21.2,

you don't even need to call BUILD-MIN-HEAP.) Each DECREASE-

KEY operation takes O(lg V) time, and there are still at most |E| such
operations. The total running time is therefore O((V + E) lg V), which is
O(E lg V) in the typical case that |E| = (V). This running time improves
upon the straightforward O(V2)-time implementation if E = o(V2/lg V).

By implementing the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci heap (see

page 478), you can improve the running time to O(V lg V + E). The
amortized cost of each of the |V| EXTRACT-MIN operations is O(lg
V), and each DECREASE-KEY call, of which there are at most |E|,
takes only O(1) amortized time. Historically, the development of

Fibonacci heaps was motivated by the observation that Dijkstra's

algorithm typically makes many more DECREASE-KEY calls than

EXTRACT-MIN calls, so that any method of reducing the amortized

time of each DECREASE-KEY operation to o(lg V) without increasing

the amortized time of EXTRACT-MIN would yield an asymptotically

faster implementation than with binary heaps.

Dijkstra's algorithm resembles both breadth-first search (see Section

20.2) and Prim's algorithm for computing minimum spanning trees (see

Section 21.2). It is like breadth-first search in that set S corresponds to
the set of black vertices in a breadth-first search. Just as vertices in S

have their final shortest-path weights, so do black vertices in a breadth-

first search have their correct breadth-first distances. Dijkstra's

algorithm is like Prim's algorithm in that both algorithms use a min-

priority queue to find the "lightest" vertex outside a given set (the set S

in Dijkstra's algorithm and the tree being grown in Prim's algorithm),

add this vertex into the set, and adjust the weights of the remaining
vertices outside the set accordingly.

Exercises

22.3-1

Run Dijkstra's algorithm on the directed graph of Figure 22.2, first

using vertex s as the source and then using vertex z as the source. In the
style of Figure 22.6, show the d and values and the vertices in set S

after each iteration of the while loop.

22.3-2

Give a simple example of a directed graph with negative-weight edges
for which Dijkstra's algorithm produces an incorrect answer. Why
doesn't the proof of Theorem 22.6 go through when negative-weight
edges are allowed?

22.3-3

Suppose that you change line 6 of Dijkstra's algorithm to read

6 while |Q| > 1

This change causes the while loop to execute |V| - 1 times instead of |V|

times. Is this proposed algorithm correct?

22.3-4
Modify the DIJKSTRA procedure so that the priority queue Q is more

like the queue in the BFS procedure in that it contains only vertices that

have been reached from source s so far: Q V - S and v Q implies v.d

.

22.3-5

Professor Gaedel has written a program that he claims implements

Dijkstra's algorithm. The program produces v.d and v. for each vertex
v V. Give an O(V + E)-time algorithm to check the output of the
professor's program. It should determine whether the d and attributes

match those of some shortest-paths tree. You may assume that all edge
weights are nonnegative.

22.3-6

Professor Newman thinks that he has worked out a simpler proof of
correctness for Dijkstra's algorithm. He claims that Dijkstra's algorithm
relaxes the edges of every shortest path in the graph in the order in
which they appear on the path, and therefore the path-relaxation
property applies to every vertex reachable from the source. Show that
the professor is mistaken by constructing a directed graph for which
Dijkstra's algorithm relaxes the edges of a shortest path out of order.

22.3-7
Consider a directed graph G = (V, E) on which each edge (u, v) E has
an associated value r(u, v), which is a real number in the range 0 r(u,
v) 1 that represents the reliability of a communication channel from
vertex u to vertex v. Interpret r(u, v) as the probability that the channel
from u to v will not fail, and assume that these probabilities are

independent. Give an efficient algorithm to find the most reliable path
between two given vertices.

22.3-8
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with positive weight
function w : E {1, 2, ... , W} for some positive integer W, and

assume that no two vertices have the same shortest-path weights from

source vertex s. Now define an unweighted, directed graph G = (V V,
E) by replacing each edge (u, v) E with w(u, v) unit-weight edges in
series. How many vertices does G have? Now suppose that you run a
breadth-first search on G. Show that the order in which the breadthfirst search of G colors vertices in V black is the same as the order in
which Dijkstra's algorithm extracts the vertices of V from the priority
queue when it runs on G.

22.3-9
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with nonnegative weight
function w : E {0, 1, ... , W} for some nonnegative integer W.

Modify Dijkstra's algorithm to compute the shortest paths from a given

source vertex s in O(W V + E) time.

22.3-10
Modify your algorithm from Exercise 22.3-9 to run in O((V + E) lg W)
time. (Hint: How many distinct shortest-path estimates can V - S

contain at any point in time?)

22.3-11
Suppose that you are given a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) in
which edges that leave the source vertex s may have negative weights, all

other edge weights are nonnegative, and there are no negative-weight
cycles. Argue that Dijkstra's algorithm correctly finds shortest paths

from s in this graph.

22.3-12
Suppose that you have a weighted directed graph G = (V, E) in which all
edge weights are positive real values in the range [C, 2C] for some
positive constant C. Modify Dijkstra's algorithm so that it runs in O(V
+ E) time.