22.4 Difference constraints and shortest paths

Chapter 29 studies the general linear-programming problem, showing
how to optimize a linear function subject to a set of linear inequalities.
This section investigates a special case of linear programming that
reduces to finding shortest paths from a single source. The BellmanFord algorithm then solves the resulting single-source shortest-paths
problem, thereby also solving the linear-programming problem.

Linear programming

In the general linear-programming problem, the input is an m × n matrix

A, an m-vector b, and an n-vector c. The goal is to find a vector x of n

elements that maximizes the objective function subject to the m

constraints given by Ax b.

The most popular method for solving linear programs is the simplex
algorithm, which Section 29.1 discusses. Although the simplex algorithm

does not always run in time polynomial in the size of its input, there are
other linear-programming algorithms that do run in polynomial time.
We offer here two reasons to understand the setup of linearprogramming problems. First, if you know that you can cast a given
problem as a polynomial-sized linear-programming problem, then you
immediately have a polynomial-time algorithm to solve the problem.
Second, faster algorithms exist for many special cases of linear
programming. For example, the single-pair shortest-path problem
(Exercise 22.4-4) and the maximum-flow problem (Exercise 24.1-5) are
special cases of linear programming.

Sometimes the objective function does not matter: it's enough just to

find any feasible solution, that is, any vector x that satisfies Ax b, or to

determine that no feasible solution exists. This section focuses on one

such feasibility problem.

Systems of difference constraints

In a system of difference constraints, each row of the linearprogramming matrix A contains one 1 and one -1, and all other entries
of A are 0. Thus, the constraints given by Ax b are a set of
mdifference constraints involving n unknowns, in which each constraint

is a simple linear inequality of the form

xj - xi bk,

where 1 i, j n, i j, and 1 k m.
For example, consider the problem of finding a 5-vector x = (xi) that

satisfies

This problem is equivalent to finding values for the unknowns x1, x2,
x3, x4, x5, satisfying the following 8 difference constraints:

One solution to this problem is x = (-5, -3, 0, -1, -4), which you can

verify directly by checking each inequality. In fact, this problem has

more than one solution. Another is x = (0, 2, 5, 4, 1). These two
solutions are related: each component of x is 5 larger than the
corresponding component of x. This fact is not mere coincidence.
Lemma 22.8
Let x = (x1, x2, ... , xn) be a solution to a system Ax b of difference
constraints, and let d be any constant. Then x + d = (x1 + d, x2 + d, ... ,
xn + d) is a solution to Ax b as well.

Proof For each xi and xj, we have (xj + d) - (xi + d) = xj - xi. Thus, if
x satisfies Ax b, so does x + d.

Systems of difference constraints occur in various applications. For

example, the unknowns xi might be times at which events are to occur.

Each constraint states that at least a certain amount of time, or at most
a certain amount of time, must elapse between two events. Perhaps the
events are jobs to be performed during the assembly of a product. If the

manufacturer applies an adhesive that takes 2 hours to set at time x1
and has to wait until it sets to install a part at time x2, then there is a
constraint that x2 x1 + 2 or, equivalently, that x1 - x2 -2.

Alternatively, the manufacturer might require the part to be installed
after the adhesive has been applied but no later than the time that the

adhesive has set halfway. In this case, there is a pair of constraints x2
x1 and x2 x1 + 1 or, equivalently, x1 - x2 0 and x2 - x1 1.

If all the constraints have nonnegative numbers on the right-hand

side--that is, if bi 0 for i = 1, 2, ... , m--then finding a feasible solution
is trivial: just set all the unknowns xi equal to each other. Then all the

differences are 0, and every constraint is satisfied. The problem of
finding a feasible solution to a system of difference constraints is

interesting only if at least one constraint has bi < 0.

Constraint graphs

We can interpret systems of difference constraints from a graph-

theoretic point of view. For a system Ax b of difference constraints,
let's view the m × n linear-programming matrix A as the transpose of an
incidence matrix (see Exercise 20.1-7) for a graph with n vertices and m
edges. Each vertex vi in the graph, for i = 1, 2, ... , n, corresponds to
one of the n unknown variables xi. Each directed edge in the graph
corresponds to one of the m inequalities involving two unknowns.

More formally, given a system Ax b of difference constraints, the
corresponding constraint graph is a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E),

where

V = {v0, v1, ... , vn}

and

E = {(vi, vj) : xj - xi bk is a constraint}
{(v0, v1), (v0, v2), (v0, v3), ... , (v0, vn)}.

The constraint graph includes the additional vertex v0, as we shall see

shortly, to guarantee that the graph has some vertex that can reach all

other vertices. Thus, the vertex set V consists of a vertex vi for each
unknown xi, plus an additional vertex v0. The edge set E contains an
edge for each difference constraint, plus an edge (v0, vi) for each
unknown xi. If xj - xi bk is a difference constraint, then the weight of

edge (vi, vj) is w(vi, vj) = bk. The weight of each edge leaving v0 is 0.

Figure 22.8 shows the constraint graph for the system (22.2)(22.9) of
difference constraints.

Figure 22.8 The constraint graph corresponding to the system (22.2)(22.9) of difference

constraints. The value of (v0, vi) appears in each vertex vi. One feasible solution to the
system is x = (-5, -3, 0, -1, -4).

The following theorem shows how to solve a system of difference
constraints by finding shortest-path weights in the corresponding
constraint graph.

Theorem 22.9
Given a system Ax b of difference constraints, let G = (V, E) be the
corresponding constraint graph. If G contains no negative-weight

cycles, then

is a feasible solution for the system. If G contains a negative-weight

cycle, then there is no feasible solution for the system.

Proof We first show that if the constraint graph contains no negative-

weight cycles, then equation (22.10) gives a feasible solution. Consider

any edge (vi, vj) E. The triangle inequality implies that (v0, vj) (v0,
vi) + w(vi, vj), which is equivalent to (v0, vj)-(v0, vi) w(vi, vj). Thus,
letting xi = (v0, vi) and xj = (v0, vj) satisfies the difference constraint
xj - xi w(vi, vj) that corresponds to edge (vi, vj).

Now we show that if the constraint graph contains a negative-weight
cycle, then the system of difference constraints has no feasible solution.

Without loss of generality, let the negative-weight cycle be c = v1, v2,
... , vk, where v1 = vk. (The vertex v0 cannot be on cycle c, because it
has no entering edges.) Cycle c corresponds to the following difference

constraints:

x2 - x1 w(v1, v2),
x3 - x2 w(v2, v3),

xk-1 - xk-2 w(vk-2, vk-1),
xk - xk-1 w(vk-1, vk).

We'll assume that x has a solution satisfying each of these k inequalities

and then derive a contradiction. The solution must also satisfy the

inequality that results from summing the k inequalities together. In
summing the left-hand sides, each unknown xi is added in once and
subtracted out once (remember that v1 = vk implies x1 = xk), so that

the left-hand side sums to 0. The right-hand side sums to the weight

w(c) of the cycle, giving 0 w(c). But since c is a negative-weight cycle,
w(c) < 0, and we obtain the contradiction that 0 w(c) < 0.

Solving systems of difference constraints

Theorem 22.9 suggests how to use the Bellman-Ford algorithm to solve
a system of difference constraints. Because the constraint graph

contains edges from the source vertex v0 to all other vertices, any
negative-weight cycle in the constraint graph is reachable from v0. If

the Bellman-Ford algorithm returns TRUE, then the shortest-path
weights give a feasible solution to the system. In Figure 22.8, for

example, the shortest-path weights provide the feasible solution x =
(-5, -3, 0, -1, -4), and by Lemma 22.8, x = (d - 5, d - 3, d, d - 1, d -
4) is also a feasible solution for any constant d. If the Bellman-Ford

algorithm returns FALSE, there is no feasible solution to the system of
difference constraints.

A system of difference constraints with m constraints on n
unknowns produces a graph with n + 1 vertices and n + m edges. Thus,
the Bellman-Ford algorithm provides a way to solve the system in O((n
+ 1)(n + m)) = O(n2 + nm) time. Exercise 22.4-5 asks you to modify the
algorithm to run in O(nm) time, even if m is much less than n.

Exercises

22.4-1

Find a feasible solution or determine that no feasible solution exists for
the following system of difference constraints:

x1 - x2 1,
x1 - x4 -4,
x2 - x3 2,
x2 - x5 7,
x2 - x6 5,
x3 - x6 10,
x4 - x2 2,
x5 - x1 -1,
x5 - x4 3,
x6 - x3 -8.

22.4-2

Find a feasible solution or determine that no feasible solution exists for
the following system of difference constraints:

x1 - x2 4,
x1 - x5 5,
x2 - x4 -6,

x3 - x2 1,
x4 - x1 3,
x4 - x3 5,
x4 - x5 10,
x5 - x3 -4,
x5 - x4 -8.

22.4-3
Can any shortest-path weight from the new vertex v0 in a constraint

graph be positive? Explain.

22.4-4

Express the single-pair shortest-path problem as a linear program.

22.4-5

Show how to modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm slightly so that when

using it to solve a system of difference constraints with m inequalities
on n unknowns, the running time is O(nm).

22.4-6
Consider adding equality constraints of the form xi = xj + bk to a

system of difference constraints. Show how to solve this variety of

constraint system.

22.4-7

Show how to solve a system of difference constraints by a Bellman-

Ford-like algorithm that runs on a constraint graph without the extra

vertex v0.

22.4-8

Let Ax b be a system of m difference constraints in n unknowns. Show

that the Bellman-Ford algorithm, when run on the corresponding

constraint graph, maximizes subject to Ax b and xi 0 for all xi.

22.4-9

Show that the Bellman-Ford algorithm, when run on the constraint

graph for a system Ax b of difference constraints, minimizes the
quantity (max {xi}-min {xi}) subject to Ax b. Explain how this fact

might come in handy if the algorithm is used to schedule construction
jobs.

22.4-10
Suppose that every row in the matrix A of a linear program Ax b

corresponds to a difference constraint, a single-variable constraint of

the form xi bk, or a single-variable constraint of the form -xi bk.

Show how to adapt the Bellman-Ford algorithm to solve this variety of
constraint system.

22.4-11
Give an efficient algorithm to solve a system Ax b of difference
constraints when all of the elements of b are real-valued and all of the
unknowns xi must be integers.

22.4-12
Give an efficient algorithm to solve a system Ax b of difference
constraints when all of the elements of b are real-valued and a specified
subset of some, but not necessarily all, of the unknowns xi must be

integers.