22.5 Proofs of shortest-paths properties

Throughout this chapter, our correctness arguments have relied on the
triangle inequality, upper-bound property, no-path property,
convergence property, path-relaxation property, and predecessorsubgraph property. We stated these properties without proof on page
611. In this section, we prove them.

The triangle inequality

In studying breadth-first search (Section 20.2), we proved as Lemma
20.1 a simple property of shortest distances in unweighted graphs. The

triangle inequality generalizes the property to weighted graphs.

Lemma 22.10 (Triangle inequality)
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
and source vertex s. Then, for all edges (u, v) E,

(s, v) (s, u) + w(u, v).

Proof Suppose that p is a shortest path from source s to vertex v. Then
p has no more weight than any other path from s to v. Specifically, path
p has no more weight than the particular path that takes a shortest path
from source s to vertex u and then takes edge (u, v).

Exercise 22.5-3 asks you to handle the case in which there is no

shortest path from s to v.

Effects of relaxation on shortest-path estimates

The next group of lemmas describes how shortest-path estimates are
affected by executing a sequence of relaxation steps on the edges of a
weighted, directed graph that has been initialized by INITIALIZESINGLE-SOURCE.

Lemma 22.11 (Upper-bound property)
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
. Let s V be the source vertex, and let the graph be initialized by
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s). Then, v.d (s, v) for all v V,

and this invariant is maintained over any sequence of relaxation steps

on the edges of G. Moreover, once v.d achieves its lower bound (s, v), it

never changes.

Proof We prove the invariant v.d (s, v) for all vertices v V by

induction over the number of relaxation steps.

For the base case, v.d (s, v) holds after initialization, since if v.d =
, then v.d (s, v) for all v V - {s}, and since s.d = 0 (s, s). (Note
that (s, s) = - if s is on a negative-weight cycle and that (s, s) = 0

otherwise.)

For the inductive step, consider the relaxation of an edge (u, v). By
the inductive hypothesis, x.d (s, x) for all x V prior to the
relaxation. The only d value that may change is v.d. If it changes, we

have

v.d = u.d + w(u, v)

(s, u) + w(u, v) (by the inductive hypothesis)

(s, v) (by the triangle inequality),

and so the invariant is maintained.

The value of v.d never changes once v.d = (s, v) because, having
achieved its lower bound, v.d cannot decrease since we have just shown
that v.d (s, v), and it cannot increase because relaxation steps do not
increase d values.

Corollary 22.12 (No-path property)
Suppose that in a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with weight
function w : E , no path connects a source vertex s V to a given
vertex v V. Then, after the graph is initialized by INITIALIZESINGLE-SOURCE(G, s), we have v.d = (s, v) = , and this equation is

maintained as an invariant over any sequence of relaxation steps on the

edges of G.

Proof By the upper-bound property, we always have = (s, v) v.d,
and thus v.d = = (s, v).

Lemma 22.13
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
, and let (u, v) E. Then, immediately after edge (u, v) is relaxed by
a call of RELAX(u, v, w), we have v.d u.d + w(u, v).

Proof If, just prior to relaxing edge (u, v), we have v.d > u.d + w(u, v),
then v.d = u.d + w(u, v) afterward. If, instead, v.d u.d + w(u, v) just
before the relaxation, then neither u.d nor v.d changes, and so v.d u.d
+ w(u, v) afterward.

Lemma 22.14 (Convergence property)
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E

, let s V be a source vertex, and let s u v be a shortest path
in G for some vertices u, v V. Suppose that G is initialized by
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s) and then a sequence of
relaxation steps that includes the call RELAX(u, v, w) is executed on
the edges of G. If u.d = (s, u) at any time prior to the call, then v.d =
(s, v) at all times after the call.

Proof By the upper-bound property, if u.d = (s, u) at some point prior
to relaxing edge (u, v), then this equation holds thereafter. In particular,
after edge (u, v) is relaxed, we have

v.d u.d + w(u, v) (by Lemma 22.13)

= (s, u) + w(u, v)

= (s, u) (by Lemma 22.1 on page 606).

The upper-bound property gives v.d (s, v), from which we conclude
that v.d = (s, v), and this equation is maintained thereafter.

Lemma 22.15 (Path-relaxation property)
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
, and let s V be a source vertex. Consider any shortest path p =
v0, v1, ... , vk from s = v0 to vk. If G is initialized by INITIALIZESINGLE-SOURCE(G, s) and then a sequence of relaxation steps
occurs that includes, in order, relaxing the edges (v0, v1), (v1, v2), ... ,
(vk-1, vk), then vk.d = (s, vk) after these relaxations and at all times

afterward. This property holds no matter what other edge relaxations

occur, including relaxations that are intermixed with relaxations of the

edges of p.

Proof We show by induction that after the ith edge of path p is relaxed,
we have vi.d = (s, vi). For the base case, i = 0, and before any edges of p

have been relaxed, we have from the initialization that v0.d = s.d = 0 =
(s, s). By the upper-bound property, the value of s.d never changes

after initialization.

For the inductive step, assume that vi-1.d = (s, vi-1). What
happens when edge (vi-1, vi) is relaxed? By the convergence property,
after this relaxation, we have vi.d = (s, vi), and this equation is

maintained at all times thereafter.

Relaxation and shortest-paths trees

We now show that once a sequence of relaxations has caused the
shortest-path estimates to converge to shortest-path weights, the

predecessor subgraph G induced by the resulting values is a
shortest-paths tree for G. We start with the following lemma, which

shows that the predecessor subgraph always forms a rooted tree whose
root is the source.

Lemma 22.16
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
let s V be a source vertex, and assume that G contains no
negative-weight cycles that are reachable from s. Then, after the graph
is initialized by INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s), the predecessor
subgraph G forms a rooted tree with root s, and any sequence of
relaxation steps on edges of G maintains this property as an invariant.

Proof Initially, the only vertex in G is the source vertex, and the
lemma is trivially true. Consider a predecessor subgraph G that arises
after a sequence of relaxation steps. We first prove that G is acyclic.

Suppose for the sake of contradiction that some relaxation step creates

a cycle in the graph G. Let the cycle be c = v0, v1, ... , vk, where vk =
v0. Then, vi. = vi-1 for i = 1, 2, ... , k and, without loss of generality,
assume that relaxing edge (vk-1, vk) created the cycle in G.

We claim that all vertices on cycle c are reachable from the source
vertex s. Why? Each vertex on c has a non-NIL predecessor, and so
each vertex on c was assigned a finite shortest-path estimate when it
was assigned its non-NIL value. By the upper-bound property, each
vertex on cycle c has a finite shortest-path weight, which means that it
is reachable from s.

We'll examine the shortest-path estimates on cycle c immediately
before the call RELAX(vk-1, vk, w) and show that c is a negativeweight cycle, thereby contradicting the assumption that G contains no

negative-weight cycles that are reachable from the source. Just before

the call, we have vi. = vi-1 for i = 1, 2, ... , k - 1. Thus, for i = 1, 2, ... ,
k - 1, the last update to vi.d was by the assignment vi.d =
vi-1.d+w(vi-1, vi). If vi-1.d changed since then, it decreased. Therefore,
just before the call RELAX(vk-1, vk, w), we have

Because vk. is changed by the call RELAX(vk-1, vk, w), immediately

beforehand we also have the strict inequality

vk.d > vk-1.d + wvk-1, vk):
Summing this strict inequality with the k - 1 inequalities (22.11), we

obtain the sum of the shortest-path estimates around cycle c:

But

Figure 22.9 Showing that a simple path in G from source vertex s to vertex v is unique. If G
contains two paths p1 (s u x z v) and p2 (s u y z v), where x y, then z.
= x and z. = y, a contradiction.

since each vertex in the cycle c appears exactly once in each summation.

This equation implies

Thus, the sum of weights around the cycle c is negative, which provides
the desired contradiction.

We have now proven that G is a directed, acyclic graph. To show
that it forms a rooted tree with root s, it suffices (see Exercise B.5-2 on
page 1175) to prove that for each vertex v V, there is a unique simple
path from s to v in G.

The vertices in V are those with non-NIL values, plus s. Exercise
22.5-6 asks you to prove that a path from s exists to each vertex in V.

To complete the proof of the lemma, we now show that for any

vertex v V, the graph G contains at most one simple path from s to
v. Suppose otherwise. That is, suppose that, as Figure 22.9 illustrates,
G contains two simple paths from s to some vertex v: p1, which we
decompose into s u x z v, and p2, which we decompose into s
u y z v, where x y (though u could be s and z could be v).
But then, z. = x and z. = y, which implies the contradiction that x = y.
We conclude that G contains a unique simple path from s to v, and
thus G forms a rooted tree with root s.

We can now show that if all vertices have been assigned their true
shortest-path weights after a sequence of relaxation steps, then the

predecessor subgraph G is a shortest-paths tree.

Lemma 22.17 (Predecessor-subgraph property)
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E

, let s V be a source vertex, and assume that G contains no
negative-weight cycles that are reachable from s. Then, after a call to
INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s) followed by any sequence of
relaxation steps on edges of G that produces v.d = (s, v) for all v V,
the predecessor subgraph G is a shortest-paths tree rooted at s.

Proof We must prove that the three properties of shortest-paths trees

given on page 608 hold for G. To show the first property, we must show

that V is the set of vertices reachable from s. By definition, a shortest-

path weight (s, v) is finite if and only if v is reachable from s, and thus

the vertices that are reachable from s are exactly those with finite d

values. But a vertex v V - {s} has been assigned a finite value for v.d

if and only if v. NIL, since both assignments occur in RELAX. Thus,

the vertices in V are exactly those reachable from s.

The second property, that G forms a rooted tree with root s, follows

directly from Lemma 22.16.

It remains, therefore, to prove the last property of shortest-paths

trees: for each vertex v V, the unique simple path in G is a

shortest path from s to v in G. Let p = v0, v1, ... , vk, where v0 = s and

vk = v. Consider an edge (vi-1, vi) in path p. Because this edge belongs

to G, the last relaxation that changed vi.d must have been of this edge.

After that relaxation, we had vi.d = vi-1.d + (vi-1, vi). Subsequently, an

edge entering vi-1 could have been relaxed, causing vi-1.d to decrease

further, but without changing vi.d. Therefore, we have vi.d vi-1.d +

w(vi-1, vi). Thus, for i = 1, 2, ... , k, we have both vi.d = (s, vi) and vi.d

vi-1.d + w(vi-1, vi), which together imply w(vi-1, vi) (s, vi) - (s,

vi-1). Summing the weights along path p yields

Thus, we have w(p) (s, vk). Since (s, vk) is a lower bound on the
weight of any path from s to vk, we conclude that w(p) = (s, vk), and p
is a shortest path from s to v = vk.

Exercises

22.5-1

Give two shortest-paths trees for the directed graph of Figure 22.2 on
page 609 other than the two shown.

22.5-2
Give an example of a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with weight
function w : E and source vertex s such that G satisfies the
following property: For every edge (u, v) E, there is a shortest-paths
tree rooted at s that contains (u, v) and another shortest-paths tree
rooted at s that does not contain (u, v).

22.5-3

Modify the proof of Lemma 22.10 to handle cases in which shortestpath weights are or -.

22.5-4
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with source vertex s, and
let G be initialized by INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s). Prove
that if a sequence of relaxation steps sets s. to a non-NIL value, then G

contains a negative-weight cycle.

22.5-5

Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with no negative-weight
edges. Let s V be the source vertex, and suppose that v. is allowed to
be the predecessor of v on any shortest path to v from source s if v V
- {s} is reachable from s, and NIL otherwise. Give an example of such
a graph G and an assignment of values that produces a cycle in G.

(By Lemma 22.16, such an assignment cannot be produced by a
sequence of relaxation steps.)

22.5-6
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph with weight function w : E
and no negative-weight cycles. Let s V be the source vertex, and
let G be initialized by INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE(G, s). Use
induction to prove that for every vertex v V, there exists a path from
s to v in G and that this property is maintained as an invariant over

any sequence of relaxations.

22.5-7
Let G = (V, E) be a weighted, directed graph that contains no negativeweight cycles. Let s V be the source vertex, and let G be initialized by
INITIALIZESINGLE-SOURCE(G, s). Prove that there exists a
sequence of |V| - 1 relaxation steps that produces v.d = (s, v) for all v
V.

22.5-8
Let G be an arbitrary weighted, directed graph with a negative-weight

cycle reachable from the source vertex s. Show how to construct an

infinite sequence of relaxations of the edges of G such that every

relaxation causes a shortest-path estimate to change.

Problems

22-1 Yen's improvement to Bellman-Ford

The Bellman-Ford algorithm does not specify the order in which to
relax edges in each pass. Consider the following method for deciding

upon the order. Before the first pass, assign an arbitrary linear order v1,

v2, ... , v|V| to the vertices of the input graph G = (V, E). Then partition
the edge set E into Ef Eb, where Ef = {(vi, vj) E : i < j} and Eb =
{(vi, vj) E : i > j}. (Assume that G contains no self-loops, so that every
edge belongs to either Ef or Eb.) Define Gf = (V, Ef) and Gb = (V, Eb).

a. Prove that Gf is acyclic with topological sort v1, v2, ... , v|V| and
that Gb is acyclic with topological sort v|V|, v|V|-1, ... , v1.

Suppose that each pass of the Bellman-Ford algorithm relaxes edges in

the following way. First, visit each vertex in the order v1, v2, ... , v|V|,
relaxing edges of Ef that leave the vertex. Then visit each vertex in the
order v|V|, v|V|-1, ..., v1, relaxing edges of Eb that leave the vertex.

b. Prove that with this scheme, if G contains no negative-weight cycles
that are reachable from the source vertex s, then after only |V| / 2
passes over the edges, v.d = (s, v) for all vertices v V.

c. Does this scheme improve the asymptotic running time of the

Bellman-Ford algorithm?

22-2 Nesting boxes

A d-dimensional box with dimensions (x1, x2, ... , xd) nests within
another box with dimensions (y1, y2, ... , yd) if there exists a
permutation on {1, 2, ... , d} such that x(1) < y1, x(2) < y2, ... ,
x(d) < yd.

a. Argue that the nesting relation is transitive.

b. Describe an efficient method to determine whether one d-dimensional

box nests inside another.

c. You are given a set of n d-dimensional boxes {B1, B2, ... , Bn}. Give

an efficient algorithm to find the longest sequence of

boxes such that nests within for j = 1, 2, ... , k - 1. Express the

running time of your algorithm in terms of n and d.

22-3 Arbitrage

Arbitrage is the use of discrepancies in currency exchange rates to

transform one unit of a currency into more than one unit of the same

currency. For example, suppose that one U.S. dollar buys 64 Indian

rupees, one Indian rupee buys 1:8 Japanese yen, and one Japanese yen

buys 0:009 U.S. dollars. Then, by converting currencies, a trader can

start with 1 U.S. dollar and buy 64 × 1.8 × 0.009 = 1.0368 U.S. dollars,

thus turning a profit of 3.68%.

Suppose that you are given n currencies c1, c2, ... , cn and an n × n
table R of exchange rates, such that 1 unit of currency ci buys R[i, j]
units of currency cj.

a. Give an efficient algorithm to determine whether there exists a

sequence of currencies such that

R[i1, i2] · R[i2, i3] ... R[ik-1, ik] · R[ik, i1] > 1.

Analyze the running time of your algorithm.

b. Give an efficient algorithm to print out such a sequence if one exists.

Analyze the running time of your algorithm.

22-4 Gabow's scaling algorithm for single-source shortest paths

A scaling algorithm solves a problem by initially considering only the

highest-order bit of each relevant input value, such as an edge weight,
assuming that these values are nonnegative integers. The algorithm then
refines the initial solution by looking at the two highest-order bits. It
progressively looks at more and more high-order bits, refining the
solution each time, until it has examined all bits and computed the
correct solution.

This problem examines an algorithm for computing the shortest
paths from a single source by scaling edge weights. The input is a

directed graph G = (V, E) with nonnegative integer edge weights w. Let
W = max {w(u, v) : (u, v) = E} be the maximum weight of any edge. In
this problem, you will develop an algorithm that runs in O(E lg W) time.

Assume that all vertices are reachable from the source.

The scaling algorithm uncovers the bits in the binary representation
of the edge weights one at a time, from the most significant bit to the

least significant bit. Specifically, let k = lg(W + 1) be the number of
bits in the binary representation of W, and for i = 1, 2, ... , k, let wi(u,v)
= w(u,v)/2ki. That is, wi (u, v) is the "scaled-down" version of w(u, v)
given by the i most significant bits of w(u, v). (Thus, wk(u, v) = w(u, v)
for all (u, v) E.) For example, if k = 5 and w(u, v) = 25, which has the
binary representation 11001, then w3(u, v) = 110 = 6. Also with k =
5, if w(u, v) = 00100 = 4, then w4(u, v) = 0010 = 2. Define i(u, v) as
the shortest-path weight from vertex u to vertex v using weight function
wi, so that k(u, v) = (u, v) for all u, v V. For a given source vertex s,
the scaling algorithm first computes the shortest-path weights 1(s, v)
for all v V, then computes 2(s, v) for all v V, and so on, until it
computes k(s, v) for all v V. Assume throughout that |E| |V| - 1.
You will show how to compute i from i-1 in O(E) time, so that the
entire algorithm takes O(kE) = O(E lg W) time.

a. Suppose that for all vertices v V, we have (s, v) |E|. Show how to
compute (s, v) for all v V in O(E) time.

b. Show how to compute 1(s, v) for all v V in O(E) time.

Now focus on computing i from i-1.

c. Prove that for i = 2, 3, ... , k, either wi(u, v) = 2wi-1(u, v) or wi(u, v) =
2wi-1(u, v) + 1. Then prove that

2i-1(s, v) i(s, v) 2i-1(s, v) + |V| - 1

for all v V.

d. Define, for i = 2, 3, ... , k and all (u, v) E,

i(u, v) = wi(u, v) + 2i-1(s, u) - 2i-1(s, v).

Prove that for i = 2, 3, ... , k and all u, v V, the "reweighted" value
i(u, v) of edge (u, v) is a nonnegative integer.

e. Now define as the shortest-path weight from s to v using the
weight function i. Prove that for i = 2, 3, ... , k and all v V,

and that .

f. Show how to compute i(s, v) from i-1(s, v) for all v V in O(E)
time. Conclude that you can compute (s, v) for all v V in O(E lg W)

time.

22-5 Karp's minimum mean-weight cycle algorithm

Let G = (V, E) be a directed graph with weight function w : E , and
let n = |V|. We define the mean weight of a cycle c = e1, e2, ... , ek of
edges in E to be

Let * = min {(c) : c is a directed cycle in G}. We call a cycle c for
which (c) = * a minimum mean-weight cycle. This problem investigates

an efficient algorithm for computing *.

Assume without loss of generality that every vertex v V is
reachable from a source vertex s V. Let (s, v) be the weight of a
shortest path from s to v, and let k(s, v) be the weight of a shortest
path from s to v consisting of exactly k edges. If there is no path from s
to v with exactly k edges, then k(s, v) = .

a. Show that if * = 0, then G contains no negative-weight cycles and
(s, v) = min {k(s, v) : 0 k n - 1} for all vertices v V.

b. Show that if * = 0, then

for all vertices v V. (Hint: Use both properties from part (a).)
c. Let c be a 0-weight cycle, and let u and v be any two vertices on c.

Suppose that * = 0 and that the weight of the simple path from u to v
along the cycle is x. Prove that (s, v) = (s, u) + x. (Hint: The weight
of the simple path from v to u along the cycle is -x.)
d. Show that if * = 0, then on each minimum mean-weight cycle there
exists a vertex v such that

(Hint: Show how to extend a shortest path to any vertex on a

minimum mean-weight cycle along the cycle to make a shortest path
to the next vertex on the cycle.)

e. Show that if * = 0, then the minimum value of

taken over all vertices v V, equals 0.
f. Show that if you add a constant t to the weight of each edge of G,

then * increases by t. Use this fact to show that * equals the

minimum value of

taken over all vertices v V.
g. Give an O(VE)-time algorithm to compute *.

22-6 Bitonic shortest paths
A sequence is bitonic if it monotonically increases and then

monotonically decreases, or if by a circular shift it monotonically
increases and then monotonically decreases. For example the sequences
1, 4, 6, 8, 3, -2, 9, 2, -4, -10, -5, and 1, 2, 3, 4 are bitonic, but 1,

3, 12, 4, 2, 10 is not bitonic. (See Problem 14-3 on page 407 for the

bitonic euclidean traveling-salesperson problem.)

Suppose that you are given a directed graph G = (V, E) with weight
function w : E , where all edge weights are unique, and you wish to
find single-source shortest paths from a source vertex s. You are given
one additional piece of information: for each vertex v V, the weights
of the edges along any shortest path from s to v form a bitonic

sequence.

Give the most efficient algorithm you can to solve this problem, and

analyze its running time.

Chapter notes

The shortest-path problem has a long history that is nicely desribed in

an article by Schrijver [400]. He credits the general idea of repeatedly

executing edge relaxations to Ford [148]. Dijkstra's algorithm [116]

appeared in 1959, but it contained no mention of a priority queue. The

Bellman-Ford algorithm is based on separate algorithms by Bellman

[45] and Ford [149]. The same algorithm is also attributed to Moore

[334]. Bellman describes the relation of shortest paths to difference

constraints. Lawler [276] describes the linear-time algorithm for

shortest paths in a dag, which he considers part of the folklore.

When edge weights are relatively small nonnegative integers, more

efficient algorithms result from using min-priority queues that require

integer keys and rely on the sequence of values returned by the

EXTRACT-MIN calls in Dijkstra's algorithm monotonically increasing

over time. Ahuja, Mehlhorn, Orlin, and Tarjan [8] give an algorithm that

runs in time on graphs with nonnegative edge weights,

where W is the largest weight of any edge in the graph. The best bounds

are by Thorup [436], who gives an algorithm that runs in O(E lg lg V)

time, and by Raman [375], who gives an algorithm that runs in O(E + V

min {(lg V)1/3+, (lg W)1/4+}) time. These two algorithms use an

amount of space that depends on the word size of the underlying

machine. Although the amount of space used can be unbounded in the

size of the input, it can be reduced to be linear in the size of the input

using randomized hashing.

For undirected graphs with integer weights, Thorup [435] gives an

algorithm that runs in O(V + E) time for single-source shortest paths.

In contrast to the algorithms mentioned in the previous paragraph, the

sequence of values returned by EXTRACT-MIN calls does not

monotonically increase over time, and so this algorithm is not an

implementation of Dijkstra's algorithm. Pettie and Ramachandran [357]

remove the restriction of integer weights on undirected graphs. Their

algorithm entails a preprocessing phase, followed by queries for specific

source vertices. Preprocessing takes O(MST(V, E) + min {V lg V, V lg

lg r}) time, where MST(V, E) is the time to compute a minimum

spanning tree and r is the ratio of the maximum edge weight to the

minimum edge weight. After preprocessing, each query takes

time, where is the inverse of Ackermann's function.

(See the chapter notes for Chapter 19 for a brief discussion of

Ackermann's function and its inverse.)

For graphs with negative edge weights, an algorithm due to Gabow

and Tarjan [167] runs in time, and one by Goldberg [186]

runs in time, where W = max {|w(u, v)| : (u, v) E}. There

has also been some progress based on methods that use continuous

optimization and electrical flows. Cohen et al. [98] give such an

algorithm, which is randomized and runs in Õ(E10/7 lg W) expected

time (see Problem 3-6 on page 73 for the defintion of Õ-notation).

There is also a pseudopolyomial-time algorithm based on fast matrix

multiplication. Sankowski [394] and Yuster and Zwick [465] designed an

algorithm for shortest paths that runs in Õ(W V) time, where two n ×

n matrices can be multiplied in O(n) time, giving a faster algorithm

than the previously mentioned algorithms for small values of W on

dense graphs.

Cherkassky, Goldberg, and Radzik [89] conducted extensive

experiments comparing various shortest-path algorithms. Shortest-path

algorithms are widely used in real-time navigation and route-planning

applications. Typically based on Dijkstra's algorithm, these algorithms

use many clever ideas to be able to compute shortest paths on networks

with many millions of vertices and edges in fractions of a second. Bast
et al. [36] survey many of these developments.

1 It may seem strange that the term "relaxation" is used for an operation that tightens an
upper bound. The use of the term is historical. The outcome of a relaxation step can be viewed

as a relaxation of the constraint v.d u.d + w(u, v), which, by the triangle inequality (Lemma
22.10 on page 633), must be satisfied if u.d = (s, u) and v.d = (s, v). That is, if v.d u.d + w(u,
v), there is no "pressure" to satisfy this constraint, so the constraint is "relaxed."

2 "PERT" is an acronym for "program evaluation and review technique."

23 All-Pairs Shortest Paths

In this chapter, we turn to the problem of finding shortest paths
between all pairs of vertices in a graph. A classic application of this
problem occurs in computing a table of distances between all pairs of
cities for a road atlas. Classic perhaps, but not a true application of

finding shortest paths between all pairs of vertices. After all, a road map
modeled as a graph has one vertex for every road intersection and one

edge wherever a road connects intersections. A table of intercity
distances in an atlas might include distances for 100 cities, but the
United States has approximately 300,000 signal-controlled
intersections1 and many more uncontrolled intersections.

A legitimate application of all-pairs shortest paths is to determine

the diameter of a network: the longest of all shortest paths. If a directed

graph models a communication network, with the weight of an edge
indicating the time required for a message to traverse a communication
link, then the diameter gives the longest possible transit time for a
message in the network.

As in Chapter 22, the input is a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E)
with a weight function w : E that maps edges to real-valued
weights. Now the goal is to find, for every pair of vertices u, v V, a
shortest (least-weight) path from u to v, where the weight of a path is

the sum of the weights of its constituent edges. For the all-pairs
problem, the output typically takes a tabular form in which the entry in

u's row and v's column is the weight of a shortest path from u to v.

You can solve an all-pairs shortest-paths problem by running a

single-source shortest-paths algorithm |V| times, once with each vertex

as the source. If all edge weights are nonnegative, you can use Dijkstra's
algorithm. If you implement the min-priority queue with a linear array,

the running time is O(V3 + VE) which is O(V3). The binary min-heap

implementation of the min-priority queue yields a running time of

O(V(V + E) lg V). If |E| = (V), the running time becomes O(VE lg V),
which is faster than O(V3) if the graph is sparse. Alternatively, you can

implement the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci heap, yielding a

running time of O(V2 lg V + VE).

If the graph contains negative-weight edges, Dijkstra's algorithm
doesn't work, but you can run the slower Bellman-Ford algorithm once

from each vertex. The resulting running time is O(V2E), which on a
dense graph is O(V4). This chapter shows how to guarantee a much

better asymptotic running time. It also investigates the relation of the
all-pairs shortest-paths problem to matrix multiplication.

Unlike the single-source algorithms, which assume an adjacency-list
representation of the graph, most of the algorithms in this chapter
represent the graph by an adjacency matrix. (Johnson's algorithm for
sparse graphs, in Section 23.3, uses adjacency lists.) For convenience, we

assume that the vertices are numbered 1, 2, ... , |V|, so that the input is
an n × n matrix W = (wij) representing the edge weights of an n-vertex
directed graph G = (V, E), where

The graph may contain negative-weight edges, but we assume for the
time being that the input graph contains no negative-weight cycles.

The tabular output of each of the all-pairs shortest-paths algorithms

presented in this chapter is an n × n matrix. The (i, j) entry of the
output matrix contains (i, j), the shortest-path weight from vertex i to
vertex j, as in Chapter 22.

A full solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem includes not

only the shortest-path weights but also a predecessor matrix = (ij),
where ij is NIL if either i = j or there is no path from i to j, and
otherwise ij is the predecessor of j on some shortest path from i. Just
as the predecessor subgraph G from Chapter 22 is a shortest-paths
tree for a given source vertex, the subgraph induced by the ith row of
the matrix should be a shortest-paths tree with root i. For each vertex
i V, the predecessor subgraph of G for i is G,i = (V,i, E,i), where

V,i = {j V : ij NIL} {i},
E,i = {(ij, j) : j V,i - {i}}.

If G,i is a shortest-paths tree, then PRINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-

PATH on the following page, which is a modified version of the PRINT-

PATH procedure from Chapter 20, prints a shortest path from vertex i
to vertex j.

In order to highlight the essential features of the all-pairs algorithms
in this chapter, we won't cover how to compute predecessor matrices
and their properties as extensively as we dealt with predecessor
subgraphs in Chapter 22. Some of the exercises cover the basics.

PRINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PATH(, i, j)
1 if i == j
2 print i
3 elseif ij == NIL
4 print "no path from" i "to" j "exists"
5 else PRINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PATH(, i, ij)
6 print j

Chapter outline

Section 23.1 presents a dynamic-programming algorithm based on
matrix multiplication to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem. The

technique of "repeated squaring" yields a running time of (V3 lg V).

Section 23.2 gives another dynamic-programming algorithm, the Floyd-

Warshall algorithm, which runs in (V3) time. Section 23.2 also covers

the problem of finding the transitive closure of a directed graph, which

is related to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem. Finally, Section 23.3

presents Johnson's algorithm, which solves the all-pairs shortest-paths

problem in O(V2 lg V + VE) time and is a good choice for large, sparse

graphs.

Before proceeding, we need to establish some conventions for

adjacency-matrix representations. First, we generally assume that the

input graph G = (V, E) has n vertices, so that n = |V|. Second, we use the
convention of denoting matrices by uppercase letters, such as W, L, or
D, and their individual elements by subscripted lowercase letters, such
as wij, lij, or dij. Finally, some matrices have parenthesized superscripts,

as in or , to indicate iterates.