23.1 Shortest paths and matrix multiplication

This section presents a dynamic-programming algorithm for the all-

pairs shortest-paths problem on a directed graph G = (V, E). Each

major loop of the dynamic program invokes an operation similar to
matrix multiplication, so that the algorithm looks like repeated matrix

multiplication. We'll start by developing a (V4)-time algorithm for the

all-pairs shortest-paths problem, and then we'll improve its running

time to (V3 lg V).

Before proceeding, let's briefly recap the steps given in Chapter 14
for developing a dynamic-programming algorithm:

1. Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.

2. Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.

3. Compute the value of an optimal solution in a bottom-up
fashion.

We reserve the fourth step--constructing an optimal solution from
computed information--for the exercises.

The structure of a shortest path

Let's start by characterizing the structure of an optimal solution.

Lemma 22.1 tells us that all subpaths of a shortest path are shortest

paths. Consider a shortest path p from vertex i to vertex j, and suppose

that p contains at most r edges. Assuming that there are no negative-

weight cycles, r is finite. If i = j, then p has weight 0 and no edges. If

vertices i and j are distinct, then decompose path p into , where

path p now contains at most r - 1 edges. Lemma 22.1 says that p is a

shortest path from i to k, and so (i, j) = (i, k) + wkj.

A recursive solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem

Now, let be the minimum weight of any path from vertex i to vertex j
that contains at most r edges. When r = 0, there is a shortest path from i
to j with no edges if and only if i = j, yielding

For r 1, one way to achieve a minimum-weight path from i to j with at

most r edges is by taking a path containing at most r - 1 edges, so that

. Another way is by taking a path of at most r - 1 edges from i

to some vertex k and then taking the edge (k, j), so that .

Therefore, to examine paths from i to j consisting of at most r edges, try

all possible predecessors k of j, giving the recursive definition

The last equality follows from the observation that wjj = 0 for all j.
What are the actual shortest-path weights (i, j)? If the graph

contains no negative-weight cycles, then whenever (i, j) < , there is a
shortest path from vertex i to vertex j that is simple. (A path p from i to
j that is not simple contains a cycle. Since each cycle's weight is

nonnegative, removing all cycles from the path leaves a simple path with

weight no greater than p's weight.) Because any simple path contains at
most n - 1 edges, a path from vertex i to vertex j with more than n - 1
edges cannot have lower weight than a shortest path from i to j. The

actual shortest-path weights are therefore given by

Computing the shortest-path weights bottom up

Taking as input the matrix W = (wij), let's see how to compute a series

of matrices L(0), L(1), ... , L(n-1), where for r = 0, 1, ... , n -

1. The initial matrix is L(0) given by equation (23.2). The final matrix

L(n-1) contains the actual shortest-path weights.

The heart of the algorithm is the procedure EXTEND-SHORTEST-

PATHS, which implements equation (23.3) for all i and j. The four

inputs are the matrix L(r-1) computed so far; the edge-weight matrix

W; the output matrix L(r), which will hold the computed result and

whose elements are all initialized to before invoking the procedure;

and the number n of vertices. The superscripts r and r - 1 help to make

the correspondence of the pseudocode with equation (23.3) plain, but

they play no actual role in the pseudocode. The procedure extends the

shortest paths computed so far by one more edge, producing the matrix

L(r) of shortest-path weights from the matrix L(r-1) computed so far.

Its running time is (n3) due to the three nested for loops.

EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS(L(r-1), W, L(r), n)

1 // Assume that the elements of L(r) are initialized to .

2 for i = 1 to n

3 for j = 1 to n

4 for k = 1 to n

5

Let's now understand the relation of this computation to matrix

multiplication. Consider how to compute the matrix product C = A · B
of two n × n matrices A and B. The straightforward method used by

MATRIX-MULTIPLY on page 81 uses a triply nested loop to

implement equation (4.1), which we repeat here for convenience:

for i, j = 1, 2, ... , n. Now make the substitutions

l(r-1) a,
w b,

l(r) c,

min +,

+.

in equation (23.3). You get equation (23.5)! Making these changes to

EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS, and also replacing (the identity for

min) by 0 (the identity for +), yields the procedure MATRIX-

MULTIPLY. We can see that the procedure EXTEND-SHORTEST-

PATHS(L(r-1), W, L(r), n) computes the matrix "product" L(r) =
L(r-1). W using this unusual definition of matrix multiplication.2

Thus, we can solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem by

repeatedly multiplying matrices. Each step extends the shortest-path

weights computed so far by one more edge using EXTEND-

SHORTEST-PATHS(L(r-1), W, L(r), n) to perform the matrix
multiplication. Starting with the matrix L(0), we produce the following
sequence of n - 1 matrices corresponding to powers of W:

L(1) = L(0) · W = W1,
L(2) = L(1) · W = W2,
L(3) = L(2) · W = W3,

= =

L(n-1) L(n-2) · W Wn-1.

At the end, the matrix L(n-1) = Wn-1 contains the shortest-path

weights.
The procedure SLOW-APSP on the next page computes this

sequence in (n4) time. The procedure takes the n × n matrices W and
L(0) as inputs, along with n. Figure 23.1 illustrates its operation. The
pseudocode uses two n × n matrices L and M to store powers of W,
computing M = L · W on each iteration. Line 2 initializes L = L(0). For
each iteration r, line 4 initializes M = , where in this context is a
matrix of scalar values. The rth iteration starts with the invariant L =
L(r-1) = Wr-1. Line 6 computes M = L · W = L(r-1) · W = Wr-1 · W
= Wr = L(r) so that the invariant can be restored for the next iteration
by line 7, which sets L = M. At the end, the matrix L = L(n-1) = Wn-1
of shortest-path weights is returned. The assignments to n × n matrices
in lines 2, 4, and 7 implicitly run doubly nested loops that take (n2)
time for each assignment. The n - 1 invocations of EXTENDSHORTEST-PATHS, each of which takes (n3) time, dominate the
computation, yielding a total running time of (n4).

Figure 23.1 A directed graph and the sequence of matrices L(r) computed by SLOW-APSP.
You might want to verify that L(5), defined as L(4) · W, equals L(4), and thus L(r) = L(4) for
all r 4.

SLOW-APSP(W, L(0), n)
1 let L = (lij) and M = (mij) be new n × n matrices
2 L = L(0)
3 for r = 1 to n - 1
4 M = // initialize M
5 // Compute the matrix "product" M = L · W.
6 EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS(L, W, M, n)
7 L=M
8 return L

Improving the running time

Bear in mind that the goal is not to compute all the L(r) matrices: only
the matrix L(n-1) matters. Recall that in the absence of negative-weight
cycles, equation (23.4) implies L(r) = L(n-1) for all integers r n - 1.

Just as traditional matrix multiplication is associative, so is matrix
multiplication defined by the EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS procedure

(see Exercise 23.1-4). In fact, we can compute L(n-1) with only lg(n
1) matrix products by using the technique of repeated squaring:

Since 2lg(n 1) n 1, the final product is .

The procedure FASTER-APSP implements this idea. It takes just

the n × n matrix W and the size n as inputs. Each iteration of the while

loop of lines 48 starts with the invariant L = Wr, which it squares

using EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS to obtain the matrix M = L2 =

(Wr)2 = W2r. At the end of each iteration, the value of r doubles, and L

for the next iteration becomes M, restoring the invariant. Upon exiting

the loop when r n - 1, the procedure returns L = Wr = L(r) = L(n-1)
by equation (23.4). As in SLOW-APSP, the assignments to n × n

matrices in lines 2, 5, and 8 implicitly run doubly nested loops, taking

(n2) time for each assignment.

FASTER-APSP(W, n)

1 let L and M be new n × n matrices

2 L=W

3 r=1

4 while r < n - 1

5 M= // initialize M

6 EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS(L,// compute M = L2
L, M, n)

7 r = 2r

8 L=M // ready for the next

iteration

9 return L

Because each of the lg(n 1) matrix products takes (n3) time,
FASTER-APSP runs in (n3 lg n) time. The code is tight, containing no

elaborate data structures, and the constant hidden in the -notation is
therefore small.

Exercises

23.1-1

Run SLOW-APSP on the weighted, directed graph of Figure 23.2,
showing the matrices that result for each iteration of the loop. Then do
the same for FASTER-APSP.

Figure 23.2 A weighted, directed graph for use in Exercises 23.1-1, 23.2-1, and 23.3-1.

23.1-2

Why is it convenient for both SLOW-APSP and FASTER-APSP that

wii = 0 for i = 1, 2, ... , n?
23.1-3

What does the matrix

used in the shortest-paths algorithms correspond to in regular matrix
multiplication?

23.1-4

Show that matrix multiplication defined by EXTEND-SHORTESTPATHS is associative.

23.1-5

Show how to express the single-source shortest-paths problem as a
product of matrices and a vector. Describe how evaluating this product
corresponds to a Bellman-Ford-like algorithm (see Section 22.1).

23.1-6
Argue that we don't need the matrix M in SLOW-APSP because by
substituting L for M and leaving out the initialization of M, the code
still works correctly. (Hint: Relate line 5 of EXTEND-SHORTEST-

PATHS to RELAX on page 610.) Do we need the matrix M in

FASTER-APSP?

23.1-7

Suppose that you also want to compute the vertices on shortest paths in
the algorithms of this section. Show how to compute the predecessor

matrix from the completed matrix L of shortest-path weights in O(n3)

time.

23.1-8

You can also compute the vertices on shortest paths along with
computing the shortest-path weights. Define as the predecessor of

vertex j on any minimum-weight path from vertex i to vertex j that
contains at most r edges. Modify the EXTEND-SHORTEST-PATHS

and SLOW-APSP procedures to compute the matrices (1), (2), ... ,

(n-1) as they compute the matrices L(1), L(2), ... , L(n-1).

23.1-9

Modify FASTER-APSP so that it can determine whether the graph
contains a negative-weight cycle.

23.1-10

Give an efficient algorithm to find the length (number of edges) of a
minimum-length negative-weight cycle in a graph.