23.3 Johnson's algorithm for sparse graphs

Johnson's algorithm finds shortest paths between all pairs in O(V2 lg V
+ VE) time. For sparse graphs, it is asymptotically faster than either

repeated squaring of matrices or the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. The
algorithm either returns a matrix of shortest-path weights for all pairs
of vertices or reports that the input graph contains a negative-weight
cycle. Johnson's algorithm uses as subroutines both Dijkstra's algorithm
and the Bellman-Ford algorithm, which Chapter 22 describes.

Johnson's algorithm uses the technique of reweighting, which works
as follows. If all edge weights w in a graph G = (V, E) are nonnegative,

Dijkstra's algorithm can find shortest paths between all pairs of vertices
by running it once from each vertex. With the Fibonacci-heap min-

priority queue, the running time of this all-pairs algorithm is O(V2 lg V
+ VE). If G has negative-weight edges but no negative-weight cycles,

first compute a new set of nonnegative edge weights so that Dijkstra's
algorithm applies. The new set of edge weights must satisfy two
important properties:

1. For all pairs of vertices u, v V, a path p is a shortest path from
u to v using weight function w if and only if p is also a shortest
path from u to v using weight function .

2. For all edges (u, v), the new weight (u, v) is nonnegative.

As we'll see in a moment, preprocessing G to determine the new weight
function takes O(VE) time.

Preserving shortest paths by reweighting

The following lemma shows how to reweight the edges to satisfy the first
property above. We use to denote shortest-path weights derived from

weight function w and to denote shortest-path weights derived from

weight function .

Lemma 23.1 (Reweighting does not change shortest paths)
Given a weighted, directed graph G = (V, E) with weight function w : E
, let h : V be any function mapping vertices to real numbers.
For each edge (u, v) E, define

Let p = v0, v1, ... , vk be any path from vertex v0 to vertex vk. Then p

is a shortest path from v0 to vk with weight function w if and only if it is

a shortest path with weight function . That is, w(p) = (v0, vk) if and

only if . Furthermore, G has a negative-weight cycle using

weight function w if and only if G has a negative-weight cycle using

weight function .

Proof We start by showing that

We have

Therefore, any path p from v0 to vk has (p) = w(p) + h(v0) - h(vk).

Because h(v0) and h(vk) do not depend on the path, if one path from v0

to vk is shorter than another using weight function w, then it is also

shorter using . Thus, w(p) = (v0, vk) if and only if .

Finally, we show that G has a negative-weight cycle using weight

function w if and only if G has a negative-weight cycle using weight

function . Consider any cycle c = v0, v1, ... , vk, where v0 = vk. By

equation (23.11),

(c) = w(c) + h(v0) + h(vk)
= w(c),

and thus c has negative weight using w if and only if it has negative

weight using .

Producing nonnegative weights by reweighting

Our next goal is to ensure that the second property holds: (u, v) must
be nonnegative for all edges (u, v) = E. Given a weighted, directed graph
G = (V, E) with weight function w : E , we'll see how to make a new
graph G = (V, E), where V = V {s} for some new vertex s V and
E = E {(s, v) : v = V }. To incorporate the new vertex s, extend the
weight function w so that w(s, v) = 0 for all v V. Since no edges enter
s, no shortest paths in G, other than those with source s, contain s.
Moreover, G has no negative-weight cycles if and only if G has no
negative-weight cycles. Figure 23.6(a) shows the graph G
corresponding to the graph G of Figure 23.1.

Now suppose that G and G have no negative-weight cycles. Define
the function h(v) = (s, v) for all v V. By the triangle inequality
(Lemma 22.10 on page 633), we have h(v) h(u) + w(u, v) for all edges
(u, v) E. Thus, by defining reweighted edge weights according to
equation (23.10), we have (u, v) = w(u, v) + h(u) - h(v) 0, thereby
satisfying the second property. Figure 23.6(b) shows the graph G from

Figure 23.6(a) with reweighted edges.

Computing all-pairs shortest paths

Johnson's algorithm to compute all-pairs shortest paths uses the
Bellman-Ford algorithm (Section 22.1) and Dijkstra's algorithm
(Section 22.3) as subroutines. The pseudocode appears in the procedure
JOHNSON on page 666. It assumes implicitly that the edges are stored

in adjacency lists. The algorithm returns the usual |V| × |V| matrix D =
(dij), where dij = (i, j), or it reports that the input graph contains a

negative-weight cycle. As is typical for an all-pairs shortest-paths

algorithm, it assumes that the vertices are numbered from 1 to |V|.

Figure 23.6 Johnson's all-pairs shortest-paths algorithm run on the graph of Figure 23.1.

Vertex numbers appear outside the vertices. (a) The graph G with the original weight function

w. The new vertex s is blue. Within each vertex v is h(v) = (s, v). (b) After reweighting each

edge (u, v) with weight function (u, v) = w(u, v) + h(u) - h(v). (c)(g) The result of running

Dijkstra's algorithm on each vertex of G using weight function . In each part, the source

vertex u is blue, and blue edges belong to the shortest-paths tree computed by the algorithm.

Within each vertex v are the values and (u, v), separated by a slash. The value duv =

(u, v) is equal to .

JOHNSON(G, w)

1compute G, where G.V = G.V {s},
G.E = G.E {(s, v) : v G.V}, and

w(s, v) = 0 for all v G.V

2if BELLMAN-FORD(G, w, s) == FALSE

3 print "the input graph contains a negative-weight cycle"

4else for each vertex v G.V

5 set h(v) to the value of (s, v)

computed by the Bellman-Ford algorithm

6 for each edge (u, v) G.E

7 (u, v) = w(u, v) + h(u) - h(v)

8 let D = (duv) be a new n × n matrix

9 for each vertex u G.V

10 run DIJKSTRA(G, , u) to compute for all v G.V

11 for each vertex v G.V

12

13return D

The JOHNSON procedure simply performs the actions specified

earlier. Line 1 produces G. Line 2 runs the Bellman-Ford algorithm on
G with weight function w and source vertex s. If G, and hence G,

contains a negative-weight cycle, line 3 reports the problem. Lines 412

assume that G contains no negative-weight cycles. Lines 45 set h(v) to
the shortest-path weight (s, v) computed by the Bellman-Ford
algorithm for all v V. Lines 67 compute the new weights . For each
pair of vertices u, v V, the for loop of lines 912 computes the

shortest-path weight by calling Dijkstra's algorithm once from

each vertex in V. Line 12 stores in matrix entry duv the correct shortest-

path weight (u, v), calculated using equation (23.11). Finally, line 13

returns the completed D matrix. Figure 23.6 depicts the execution of

Johnson's algorithm.

If the min-priority queue in Dijkstra's algorithm is implemented by a

Fibonacci heap, Johnson's algorithm runs in O(V2 lg V + VE) time. The
simpler binary min-heap implementation yields a running time of O(VE
lg V), which is still asymptotically faster than the Floyd-Warshall

algorithm if the graph is sparse.

Exercises

23.3-1

Use Johnson's algorithm to find the shortest paths between all pairs of

vertices in the graph of Figure 23.2. Show the values of h and

computed by the algorithm.

23.3-2
What is the purpose of adding the new vertex s to V, yielding V?

23.3-3
Suppose that w(u, v) 0 for all edges (u, v) E. What is the relationship
between the weight functions w and ?

23.3-4

Professor Greenstreet claims that there is a simpler way to reweight

edges than the method used in Johnson's algorithm. Letting w* = min
{w(u, v) : (u, v) E}, just define (u, v) = w(u, v) - w* for all edges (u, v)
E. What is wrong with the professor's method of reweighting?

23.3-5
Show that if G contains a 0-weight cycle c, then (u, v) = 0 for every
edge (u, v) in c.

23.3-6

Professor Michener claims that there is no need to create a new source

vertex in line 1 of JOHNSON. He suggests using G = G instead and
letting s be any vertex. Give an example of a weighted, directed graph G

for which incorporating the professor's idea into JOHNSON causes
incorrect answers. Assume that - is undefined, and in particular, it

is not 0. Then show that if G is strongly connected (every vertex is

reachable from every other vertex), the results returned by JOHNSON
with the professor's modification are correct.

Problems

23-1 Transitive closure of a dynamic graph

You wish to maintain the transitive closure of a directed graph G = (V,
E) as you insert edges into E. That is, after inserting an edge, you
update the transitive closure of the edges inserted so far. Start with G

having no edges initially, and represent the transitive closure by a

boolean matrix.

a. Show how to update the transitive closure G* = (V, E*) of a graph G
= (V, E) in O(V2) time when a new edge is added to G.

b. Give an example of a graph G and an edge e such that (V2) time is
required to update the transitive closure after inserting e into G, no

matter what algorithm is used.

c. Give an algorithm for updating the transitive closure as edges are

inserted into the graph. For any sequence of r insertions, your

algorithm should run in time , where ti is the time to

update the transitive closure upon inserting the ith edge. Prove that

your algorithm attains this time bound.

23-2 Shortest paths in -dense graphs

A graph G = (V, E) is -dense if |E| = (V1+) for some constant in the
range 0 < 1. d-ary min-heaps (see Problem 6-2 on page 179) provide

a way to match the running times of Fibonacci-heap-based shortestpath algorithms on -dense graphs without using as complicated a data
structure.

a. What are the asymptotic running times for the operations INSERT,
EXTRACT-MIN, and DECREASE-KEY, as a function of d and the
number n of elements in a d-ary min-heap? What are these running
times if you choose d = (n) for some constant 0 < 1? Compare

these running times to the amortized costs of these operations for a
Fibonacci heap.

b. Show how to compute shortest paths from a single source on an -
dense directed graph G = (V, E) with no negative-weight edges in

O(E) time. (Hint: Pick d as a function of .)

c. Show how to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem on an -dense
directed graph G = (V, E) with no negative-weight edges in O(VE)

time.

d. Show how to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem in O(VE) time
on an -dense directed graph G = (V, E) that may have negative-

weight edges but has no negative-weight cycles.

Chapter notes

Lawler [276] has a good discussion of the all-pairs shortest-paths

problem. He attributes the matrix-multiplication algorithm to the

folklore. The Floyd-Warshall algorithm is due to Floyd [144], who based

it on a theorem of Warshall [450] that describes how to compute the

transitive closure of boolean matrices. Johnson's algorithm is taken

from [238].

Several researchers have given improved algorithms for computing

shortest paths via matrix multiplication. Fredman [153] shows how to

solve the all-pairs shortest paths problem using O(V5/2) comparisons

between sums of edge weights and obtains an algorithm that runs in

O(V3lg lg V/lg V/1/3) time, which is slightly better than the running time

of the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. This bound has been improved several

times, and the fastest algorithm is now by Williams [457], with a running

time of .

Another line of research demonstrates how to apply algorithms for

fast matrix multiplication (see the chapter notes for Chapter 4) to the

all-pairs shortest paths problem. Let O(n) be the running time of the

fastest algorithm for multiplying two n × n matrices. Galil and Margalit

[170, 171] and Seidel [403] designed algorithms that solve the all-pairs

shortest paths problem in undirected, unweighted graphs in (Vp(V))

time, where p(n) denotes a particular function that is

polylogarithmically bounded in n. In dense graphs, these algorithms are

faster than the O(VE) time needed to perform |V| breadth-first

searches. Several researchers have extended these results to give

algorithms for solving the all-pairs shortest paths problem in undirected

graphs in which the edge weights are integers in the range {1, 2, ... ,

W}. The asymptotically fastest such algorithm, by Shoshan and Zwick

[410], runs in O(W Vp(V W)) time. In directed graphs, the best

algorithm to date is due to Zwick [467] and runs in

Õ(W1/(4-)V2+1/(4-)) time.

Karger, Koller, and Phillips [244] and independently McGeoch [320]

have given a time bound that depends on E*, the set of edges in E that

participate in some shortest path. Given a graph with nonnegative edge

weights, their algorithms run in O(VE* + V2 lg V) time and improve

upon running Dijkstra's algorithm |V| times when |E*| = o(E). Pettie

[355] uses an approach based on component hierarchies to achieve a

running time of O(VE + V2 lg lg V), and the same running time is also

achieved by Hagerup [205].

Baswana, Hariharan, and Sen [37] examined decremental algorithms,

which allow a sequence of intermixed edge deletions and queries, for

maintaining all-pairs shortest paths and transitive-closure information.

When a path exists, their randomized transitive-closure algorithm can

fail to report it with probability 1/nc for an arbitrary c > 0. The query

times are O(1) with high probability. For transitive closure, the

amortized time for each update is O(V4/3 lg1/3V). By comparison,

Problem 23-1, in which edges are inserted, asks for an incremental

algorithm. For all-pairs shortest paths, the update times depend on the

queries. For queries just giving the shortest-path weights, the amortized

time per update is O(V3/E lg2V). To report the actual shortest path, the

amortized update time is min . Demetrescu and

Italiano [111] showed how to handle update and query operations when

edges are both inserted and deleted, as long as the range of edge

weights is bounded.

Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5] defined an algebraic structure known

as a "closed semiring," which serves as a general framework for solving

path problems in directed graphs. Both the Floyd-Warshall algorithm

and the transitive-closure algorithm from Section 23.2 are
instantiations of an all-pairs algorithm based on closed semirings.
Maggs and Plotkin [309] showed how to find minimum spanning trees
using a closed semiring.

1 According to a report cited by U.S. Department of Transportation Federal Highway
Administration, "a reasonable `rule of thumb' is one signalized intersection per 1,000
population."

2 An algebraic semiring contains operations , which is commutative with identity I, and
, with identity I, where distributes over on both the left and right, and where Ix
= xI = I for all x. Standard matrix multiplication, as in MATRIX-MULTIPLY, uses the
semiring with + for , for , 0 for I, and 1 for I. The procedure EXTENDSHORTEST-PATHS uses another semiring, known as the tropical semiring, with min for , +
for , for I, and 0 for I.

24 Maximum Flow

Just as you can model a road map as a directed graph in order to find
the shortest path from one point to another, you can also interpret a
directed graph as a "flow network" and use it to answer questions about
material flows. Imagine a material coursing through a system from a
source, where the material is produced, to a sink, where it is consumed.
The source produces the material at some steady rate, and the sink
consumes the material at the same rate. The "flow" of the material at
any point in the system is intuitively the rate at which the material
moves. Flow networks can model many problems, including liquids
flowing through pipes, parts through assembly lines, current through
electrical networks, and information through communication networks.

You can think of each directed edge in a flow network as a conduit
for the material. Each conduit has a stated capacity, given as a
maximum rate at which the material can flow through the conduit, such
as 200 gallons of liquid per hour through a pipe or 20 amperes of
electrical current through a wire. Vertices are conduit junctions, and
other than the source and sink, material flows through the vertices
without collecting in them. In other words, the rate at which material
enters a vertex must equal the rate at which it leaves the vertex. We call
this property "flow conservation," and it is equivalent to Kirchhoff 's
current law when the material is electrical current.

The goal of the maximum-flow problem is to compute the greatest
rate for shipping material from the source to the sink without violating
any capacity constraints. It is one of the simplest problems concerning
flow networks and, as we shall see in this chapter, this problem can be

solved by efficient algorithms. Moreover, other network-flow problems
are solvable by adapting the basic techniques used in maximum-flow
algorithms.

This chapter presents two general methods for solving the
maximum-flow problem. Section 24.1 formalizes the notions of flow
networks and flows, formally defining the maximum-flow problem.
Section 24.2 describes the classical method of Ford and Fulkerson for
finding maximum flows. We finish up with a simple application of this
method, finding a maximum matching in an undirected bipartite graph,
in Section 24.3. (Section 25.1 will give a more efficient algorithm that is
specifically designed to find a maximum matching in a bipartite graph.)