24.1 Flow networks

This section gives a graph-theoretic definition of flow networks,
discusses their properties, and defines the maximum-flow problem
precisely. It also introduces some helpful notation.

Flow networks and flows

A flow network G = (V, E) is a directed graph in which each edge (u, v)
E has a nonnegative capacity c(u, v) 0. We further require that if E
contains an edge (u, v), then there is no edge (v, u) in the reverse
direction. (We'll see shortly how to work around this restriction.) If (u,
v) E, then for convenience we define c(u, v) = 0, and we disallow selfloops. Each flow network contains two distinguished vertices: a source s
and a sink t. For convenience, we assume that each vertex lies on some
path from the source to the sink. That is, for each vertex v V, the flow
network contains a path s v t. Because each vertex other than s
has at least one entering edge, we have |E| |V | - 1. Figure 24.1 shows

an example of a flow network.

Figure 24.1 (a) A flow network G = (V, E) for the Lucky Puck Company's trucking problem.
The Vancouver factory is the source s, and the Winnipeg warehouse is the sink t. The
company ships pucks through intermediate cities, but only c(u, v) crates per day can go from
city u to city v. Each edge is labeled with its capacity. (b) A flow f in G with value |f | = 19.
Each edge (u, v) is labeled by f (u, v)/c(u, v). The slash notation merely separates the flow and

capacity and does not indicate division.

We are now ready to define flows more formally. Let G = (V, E) be a
flow network with a capacity function c. Let s be the source of the
network, and let t be the sink. A flow in G is a real-valued function f : V
× V that satisfies the following two properties:
Capacity constraint: For all u, v V, we require

0 f(u, v) c(u, v).

The flow from one vertex to another must be nonnegative and must
not exceed the given capacity.

Flow conservation: For all u V - {s, t}, we require

The total flow into a vertex other than the source or sink must
equal the total flow out of that vertex--informally, "flow in equals
flow out."

When (u, v) E, there can be no flow from u to v, and f (u, v) = 0.
We call the nonnegative quantity f (u, v) the flow from vertex u to

vertex v. The value |f | of a flow f is defined as

that is, the total flow out of the source minus the flow into the source.
(Here, the |·| notation denotes flow value, not absolute value or
cardinality.) Typically, a flow network does not have any edges into the

source, and the flow into the source, given by the summation vV f(v,
s), is 0. We include it, however, because when we introduce residual

networks later in this chapter, the flow into the source can be positive.

In the maximum-flow problem, the input is a flow network G with source
s and sink t, and the goal is to find a flow of maximum value.

An example of flow

A flow network can model the trucking problem shown in Figure

24.1(a). The Lucky Puck Company has a factory (source s) in

Vancouver that manufactures hockey pucks, and it has a warehouse

(sink t) in Winnipeg that stocks them. Lucky Puck leases space on

trucks from another firm to ship the pucks from the factory to the
warehouse. Because the trucks travel over specified routes (edges)
between cities (vertices) and have a limited capacity, Lucky Puck can

ship at most c(u, v) crates per day between each pair of cities u and v in

Figure 24.1(a). Lucky Puck has no control over these routes and
capacities, and so the company cannot alter the flow network shown in

Figure 24.1(a). They need to determine the largest number p of crates

per day that they can ship and then to produce this amount, since there
is no point in producing more pucks than they can ship to their
warehouse. Lucky Puck is not concerned with how long it takes for a
given puck to get from the factory to the warehouse. They care only

that p crates per day leave the factory and p crates per day arrive at the

warehouse.

Figure 24.2 Converting a network with antiparallel edges to an equivalent one with no

antiparallel edges. (a) A flow network containing both the edges (v1, v2) and (v2, v1). (b) An
equivalent network with no antiparallel edges. A new vertex v was added, and edge (v1, v2)
was replaced by the pair of edges (v1, v) and (v, v2), both with the same capacity as (v1, v2).

A flow in this network models the "flow" of shipments because the
number of crates shipped per day from one city to another is subject to
a capacity constraint. Additionally, the model must obey flow
conservation, for in a steady state, the rate at which pucks enter an
intermediate city must equal the rate at which they leave. Otherwise,
crates would accumulate at intermediate cities.

Modeling problems with antiparallel edges

Suppose that the trucking firm offers Lucky Puck the opportunity to
lease space for 10 crates in trucks going from Edmonton to Calgary. It
might seem natural to add this opportunity to our example and form
the network shown in Figure 24.2(a). This network suffers from one

problem, however: it violates the original assumption that if edge (v1,
v2) E, then (v2, v1) E. We call the two edges (v1, v2) and (v2, v1)
antiparallel. Thus, to model a flow problem with antiparallel edges, the

network must be transformed into an equivalent one containing no
antiparallel edges. Figure 24.2(b) displays this equivalent network. To
transform the network, choose one of the two antiparallel edges, in this

case (v1, v2), and split it by adding a new vertex v and replacing edge
(v1, v2) with the pair of edges (v1, v) and (v, v2). Also set the capacity

of both new edges to the capacity of the original edge. The resulting
network satisfies the property that if an edge belongs to the network,

the reverse edge does not. As Exercise 24.1-1 asks you to prove, the
resulting network is equivalent to the original one.

Figure 24.3 Converting a multiple-source, multiple-sink maximum-flow problem into a problem

with a single source and a single sink. (a) A flow network with three sources S = {s1, s2, s3}
and two sinks T = {t1, t2}. (b) An equivalent single-source, single-sink flow network. Add a
supersource s and an edge with infinite capacity from s to each of the multiple sources. Also
add a supersink t and an edge with infinite capacity from each of the multiple sinks to t.

Networks with multiple sources and sinks
A maximum-flow problem may have several sources and sinks, rather
than just one of each. The Lucky Puck Company, for example, might

actually have a set of m factories {s1, s2, ..., sm} and a set of n
warehouses {t1, t2, ..., tn}, as shown in Figure 24.3(a). Fortunately, this

problem is no harder than ordinary maximum flow.
The problem of determining a maximum flow in a network with

multiple sources and multiple sinks reduces to an ordinary maximumflow problem. Figure 24.3(b) shows how to convert the network from (a)
to an ordinary flow network with only a single source and a single sink.

Add a supersource s and add a directed edge (s, si) with capacity c(s, si)
= for each i = 1, 2, ..., m. Similarly, create a new supersink t and add a
directed edge (ti, t) with capacity c(ti, t) = for each i = 1, 2, ..., n.

Intuitively, any flow in the network in (a) corresponds to a flow in the

network in (b), and vice versa. The single supersource s provides as
much flow as desired for the multiple sources si, and the single

supersink t likewise consumes as much flow as desired for the multiple
sinks ti. Exercise 24.1-2 asks you to prove formally that the two

problems are equivalent.

Exercises

24.1-1

Show that splitting an edge in a flow network yields an equivalent

network. More formally, suppose that flow network G contains edge (u,
v), and define a new flow network G by creating a new vertex x and
replacing (u, v) by new edges (u, x) and (x, v) with c(u, x) = c(x, v) = c(u,
v). Show that a maximum flow in G has the same value as a maximum
flow in G.

24.1-2

Extend the flow properties and definitions to the multiple-source,
multiple-sink problem. Show that any flow in a multiple-source,
multiple-sink flow network corresponds to a flow of identical value in
the single-source, single-sink network obtained by adding a supersource
and a supersink, and vice versa.

24.1-3
Suppose that a flow network G = (V, E) violates the assumption that the
network contains a path s v t for all vertices v V. Let u be a
vertex for which there is no path s u t. Show that there must exist a
maximum flow f in G such that f (u, v) = f (v, u) = 0 for all vertices v V.

24.1-4
Let f be a flow in a network, and let be a real number. The scalar flow
product, denoted f, is a function from V × V to defined by

(f)(u, v) = · f (u, v).

Prove that the flows in a network form a convex set. That is, show that if
f1 and f2 are flows, then so is f1 + (1 - ) f2 for all in the range 0

1.

24.1-5

State the maximum-flow problem as a linear-programming problem.

24.1-6

Professor Adam has two children who, unfortunately, dislike each other.
The problem is so severe that not only do they refuse to walk to school
together, but in fact each one refuses to walk on any block that the
other child has stepped on that day. The children have no problem with
their paths crossing at a corner. Fortunately both the professor's house
and the school are on corners, but beyond that he is not sure if it is
going to be possible to send both of his children to the same school.
The professor has a map of his town. Show how to formulate the
problem of determining whether both his children can go to the same
school as a maximum-flow problem.

24.1-7
Suppose that, in addition to edge capacities, a flow network has vertex
capacities. That is each vertex v has a limit l(v) on how much flow can
pass through v. Show how to transform a flow network G = (V, E) with
vertex capacities into an equivalent flow network G = (V, E) without
vertex capacities, such that a maximum flow in G has the same value as
a maximum flow in G. How many vertices and edges does G have?