24.2 The Ford-Fulkerson method

This section presents the Ford-Fulkerson method for solving the
maximum-flow problem. We call it a "method" rather than an
"algorithm" because it encompasses several implementations with
differing running times. The Ford-Fulkerson method depends on three
important ideas that transcend the method and are relevant to many
flow algorithms and problems: residual networks, augmenting paths,
and cuts. These ideas are essential to the important max-flow min-cut
theorem (Theorem 24.6), which characterizes the value of a maximum
flow in terms of cuts of the flow network. We end this section by
presenting one specific implementation of the Ford-Fulkerson method
and analyzing its running time.

The Ford-Fulkerson method iteratively increases the value of the

flow. It starts with f (u, v) = 0 for all u, v V, giving an initial flow of
value 0. Each iteration increases the flow value in G by finding an
"augmenting path" in an associated "residual network" Gf. The edges
of the augmenting path in Gf indicate on which edges in G to update the

flow in order to increase the flow value. Although each iteration of the
Ford-Fulkerson method increases the value of the flow, we'll see that the

flow on any particular edge of G may increase or decrease. Although it

might seem counterintuitive to decrease the flow on an edge, doing so
may enable flow to increase on other edges, allowing more flow to travel
from the source to the sink. The Ford-Fulkerson method, given in the
procedure FORD-FULKERSON-METHOD, repeatedly augments the
flow until the residual network has no more augmenting paths. The
max-flow min-cut theorem shows that upon termination, this process
yields a maximum flow.

FORD-FULKERSON-METHOD (G, s, t)
1 initialize flow f to 0
2 while there exists an augmenting path p in the residual network Gf
3 augment flow f along p
4 return f

In order to implement and analyze the Ford-Fulkerson method, we
need to introduce several additional concepts.

Residual networks

Intuitively, given a flow network G and a flow f, the residual network Gf

consists of edges whose capacities represent how the flow can change

on edges of G. An edge of the flow network can admit an amount of

additional flow equal to the edge's capacity minus the flow on that edge.

If that value is positive, that edge goes into Gf with a "residual
capacity" of cf (u, v) = c(u, v) - f (u, v). The only edges of G that belong

to Gf are those that can admit more flow. Those edges (u, v) whose flow
equals their capacity have cf (u, v) = 0, and they do not belong to Gf.

You might be surprised that the residual network Gf can also contain
edges that are not in G. As an algorithm manipulates the flow, with the

goal of increasing the total flow, it might need to decrease the flow on a
particular edge in order to increase the flow elsewhere. In order to

represent a possible decrease in the positive flow f (u, v) on an edge in
G, the residual network Gf contains an edge (v, u) with residual capacity
cf (v, u) = f (u, v)--that is, an edge that can admit flow in the opposite
direction to (u, v), at most canceling out the flow on (u, v). These reverse

edges in the residual network allow an algorithm to send back flow it
has already sent along an edge. Sending flow back along an edge is

equivalent to decreasing the flow on the edge, which is a necessary

operation in many algorithms.

More formally, for a flow network G = (V, E) with source s, sink t,
and a flow f, consider a pair of vertices u, v V. We define the residual
capacity cf (u, v) by

In a flow network, (u, v) E implies (v, u) E, and so exactly one case

in equation (24.2) applies to each ordered pair of vertices.

As an example of equation (24.2), if c(u, v) = 16 and f (u, v) = 11,
then f (u, v) can increase by up to cf (u, v) = 5 units before exceeding
the capacity constraint on edge (u, v). Alternatively, up to 11 units of
flow can return from v to u, so that cf (v, u) = 11.

Given a flow network G = (V, E) and a flow f, the residual network of
G induced by f is Gf = (V, Ef), where

Figure 24.4 (a) The flow network G and flow f of Figure 24.1(b). (b) The residual network Gf
with augmenting path p, having residual capacity cf (p) = cf (v2, v3) = 4, in blue. Edges with
residual capacity equal to 0, such as (v1, v3), are not shown, a convention we follow in the
remainder of this section. (c) The flow in G that results from augmenting along path p by its
residual capacity 4. Edges carrying no flow, such as (v3, v2), are labeled only by their capacity,

another convention we follow throughout. (d) The residual network induced by the flow in (c).

That is, as promised above, each edge of the residual network, or

residual edge, can admit a flow that is greater than 0. Figure 24.4(a)
repeats the flow network G and flow f of Figure 24.1(b), and Figure
24.4(b) shows the corresponding residual network Gf. The edges in Ef
are either edges in E or their reversals, and thus

|Ef| 2 |E|.

Observe that the residual network Gf is similar to a flow network
with capacities given by cf. It does not satisfy the definition of a flow

network, however, because it could contain antiparallel edges. Other
than this difference, a residual network has the same properties as a
flow network, and we can define a flow in the residual network as one

that satisfies the definition of a flow, but with respect to capacities cf in
the residual network Gf.

A flow in a residual network provides a roadmap for adding flow to

the original flow network. If f is a flow in G and f is a flow in the

corresponding residual network Gf, we define f f, the augmentation of
flow f by f , to be a function from V × V to , defined by

The intuition behind this definition follows the definition of the

residual network. The flow on (u, v) increases by f (u, v), but decreases
by f (v, u) because pushing flow on the reverse edge in the residual

network signifies decreasing the flow in the original network. Pushing
flow on the reverse edge in the residual network is also known as

cancellation. For example, suppose that 5 crates of hockey pucks go
from u to v and 2 crates go from v to u. That is equivalent (from the
perspective of the final result) to sending 3 crates from u to v and none
from v to u. Cancellation of this type is crucial for any maximum-flow

algorithm.

The following lemma shows that augmenting a flow in G by a flow in
Gf yields a new flow in G with a greater flow value.

Lemma 24.1
Let G = (V, E) be a flow network with source s and sink t, and let f be a
flow in G. Let Gf be the residual network of G induced by f, and let f be
a flow in Gf. Then the function f f defined in equation (24.4) is a flow
in G with value |f f | = |f | + |f |.

Proof We first verify that f f obeys the capacity constraint for each
edge in E and flow conservation at each vertex in V - {s, t}.

For the capacity constraint, first observe that if (u, v) E, then cf (v,
u) = f (u, v). Because f is a flow in Gf, we have f (v, u) cf (v, u), which
gives f (v, u) f (u, v). Therefore,

(f f)(u, v) = f (u, v) + f (u, v) - f (v, u) (by equation (24.4))
f (u, v) + f (u, v) - f (u, v) (because f (v, u) f (u, v))
= f (u, v)

0.

In addition,

(f f)(u, v)

= f (u, v) + f (u, v) - f (v, u) (by equation (24.4))

f (u, v) + f (u, v) (because flows are nonnegative)

f (u, v) + cf (u, v) (capacity constraint)

= f (u, v) + c(u, v) - f (u, v) (definition of cf)

= c(u, v).

To show that flow conservation holds and that |f f | = |f | + |f |, we
first prove the claim that for all u V, we have

Because we disallow antiparallel edges in G (but not in Gf), we know
that for each vertex u, there can be an edge (u, v) or (v, u) in G, but
never both. For a fixed vertex u, define Vl(u) = {v : (u, v) E} to be the
set of vertices with edges in G leaving u, and define Ve(u) = {v : (v, u)
E} to be the set of vertices with edges in G entering u. We have Vl(u)
Ve(u) V and, because G contains no antiparallel edges, Vl(u) Ve(u)

= . By the definition of flow augmentation in equation (24.4), only

vertices v in Vl(u) can have positive (f f)(u, v), and only vertices v in
Ve(u) can have positive (f f )(v, u). Starting from the left-hand side of

equation (24.5), we use this fact and then reorder and group terms,

giving

In equation (24.6), all four summations can extend to sum over V, since

each additional term has value 0. (Exercise 24.2-1 asks you to prove this

formally.) Taking all four summations over V, instead of just subsets of
V, proves the claim in equation (24.5).

Now we are ready to prove flow conservation for f f and that |f f|
= | f | + |f |. For the latter property, let u = s in equation (24.5). Then, we

have

For flow conservation, observe that for any vertex u that is neither s nor
t, flow conservation for f and f means that the right-hand side of
equation (24.5) is 0, and thus vV (f f)(u, v) = vV (f f)(v, u).

Augmenting paths

Given a flow network G = (V, E) and a flow f, an augmenting path p is a
simple path from s to t in the residual network Gf. By the definition of
the residual network, the flow on an edge (u, v) of an augmenting path

may increase by up to cf (u, v) without violating the capacity constraint
on whichever of (u, v) and (v, u) belongs to the original flow network G.

The blue path in Figure 24.4(b) is an augmenting path. Treating the

residual network Gf in the figure as a flow network, the flow through

each edge of this path can increase by up to 4 units without violating a
capacity constraint, since the smallest residual capacity on this path is

cf (v2, v3) = 4. We call the maximum amount by which we can increase
the flow on each edge in an augmenting path p the residual capacity of
p, given by

cf (p) = min {cf (u, v) : (u, v) is in p}.

The following lemma, which Exercise 24.2-7 asks you to prove, makes
the above argument more precise.

Lemma 24.2
Let G = (V, E) be a flow network, let f be a flow in G, and let p be an
augmenting path in Gf. Define a function fp : V × V by

Then, fp is a flow in Gf with value |fp| = cf (p) > 0.

The following corollary shows that augmenting f by fp produces
another flow in G whose value is closer to the maximum. Figure 24.4(c)
shows the result of augmenting the flow f from Figure 24.4(a) by the
flow fp in Figure 24.4(b), and Figure 24.4(d) shows the ensuing residual

network.

Corollary 24.3
Let G = (V, E) be a flow network, let f be a flow in G, and let p be an
augmenting path in Gf. Let fp be defined as in equation (24.7), and
suppose that f is augmented by fp. Then the function f fp is a flow in G
with value |f fp| = |f| + |fp| > |f|.

Proof Immediate from Lemmas 24.1 and 24.2.

Cuts of flow networks

The Ford-Fulkerson method repeatedly augments the flow along
augmenting paths until it has found a maximum flow. How do we know
that when the algorithm terminates, it has actually found a maximum
flow? The max-flow min-cut theorem, which we will prove shortly, tells
us that a flow is maximum if and only if its residual network contains no
augmenting path. To prove this theorem, though, we must first explore
the notion of a cut of a flow network.

A cut (S, T) of flow network G = (V, E) is a partition of V into S and
T = V - S such that s S and t T. (This definition is similar to the

definition of "cut" that we used for minimum spanning trees in Chapter
21, except that here we are cutting a directed graph rather than an

undirected graph, and we insist that s S and t T.) If f is a flow, then
the net flow f(S, T) across the cut (S, T) is defined to be

The capacity of the cut (S, T) is

A minimum cut of a network is a cut whose capacity is minimum over all

cuts of the network.
You probably noticed that the definitions of flow across a cut and

capacity of a cut differ in that flow counts edges going in both
directions across the cut, but capacity counts only edges going from the
source side of the cut toward the sink side. This asymmetry is
intentional and important. The reason for this difference will become
apparent later in this section.

Figure 24.5 shows the cut ({s, v1, v2}, {v3, v4, t}) in the flow network

of Figure 24.1(b). The net flow across this cut is

f (v1, v3) + f (v2, v4) - f (v3, v2) = 12 + 11 - 4

= 19,
and the capacity of this cut is

Figure 24.5 A cut (S, T) in the flow network of Figure 24.1(b), where S = {s, v1, v2} and T =
{v3, v4, t}. The vertices in S are orange, and the vertices in T are tan. The net flow across (S,
T) is f (S, T) = 19, and the capacity is c(S, T) = 26.

c(v1, v3) + c(v2, v4) = 12 + 14

= 26.

The following lemma shows that, for a given flow f, the net flow
across any cut is the same, and it equals |f|, the value of the flow.
Lemma 24.4
Let f be a flow in a flow network G with source s and sink t, and let (S,
T) be any cut of G. Then the net flow across (S, T) is f (S, T) =| f|.
Proof For any vertex u V - {s, t}, rewrite the flow-conservation

condition as

Taking the definition of| f| from equation (24.1) and adding the left-

hand side of equation (24.10), which equals 0, summed over all vertices

in S - {s}, gives

Expanding the right-hand summation and regrouping terms yields

Because V = S T and S T = , splitting each summation over V into
summations over S and T gives

The two summations within the parentheses are actually the same, since

for all vertices x, y S, the term f (x, y) appears once in each

summation. Hence, these summations cancel, yielding

A corollary to Lemma 24.4 shows how cut capacities bound the
value of a flow.

Corollary 24.5
The value of any flow f in a flow network G is bounded from above by
the capacity of any cut of G.
Proof Let (S, T) be any cut of G and let f be any flow. By Lemma 24.4

and the capacity constraint,

Corollary 24.5 yields the immediate consequence that the value of a
maximum flow in a network is bounded from above by the capacity of a
minimum cut of the network. The important max-flow min-cut theorem,
which we now state and prove, says that the value of a maximum flow is
in fact equal to the capacity of a minimum cut.

Theorem 24.6 (Max-flow min-cut theorem)
If f is a flow in a flow network G = (V, E) with source s and sink t, then

the following conditions are equivalent:

1. f is a maximum flow in G.

2. The residual network Gf contains no augmenting paths.

3. |f| = c(S, T) for some cut (S, T) of G.

Proof (1) (2): Suppose for the sake of contradiction that f is a
maximum flow in G but that Gf has an augmenting path p. Then, by
Corollary 24.3, the flow found by augmenting f by fp, where fp is given
by equation (24.7), is a flow in G with value strictly greater than |f|,
contradicting the assumption that f is a maximum flow.

(2) (3): Suppose that Gf has no augmenting path, that is, that Gf
contains no path from s to t. Define

S = {v V : there exists a path from s to v in Gf }

and T = V - S. The partition (S, T) is a cut: we have s S trivially and t
S because there is no path from s to t in Gf. Now consider a pair of
vertices u S and v T. If (u, v) E, we must have f (u, v) = c(u, v),

since otherwise (u, v) Ef, which would place v in set S. If (v, u) E, we
must have f (v, u) = 0, because otherwise cf (u, v) = f (v, u) would be
positive and we would have (u, v) Ef, which again would place v in S.
Of course, if neither (u, v) nor (v, u) belongs to E, then f (u, v) = f (v, u)

= 0. We thus have

By Lemma 24.4, therefore, |f| = f (S, T) = c(S, T).
(3) (1): By Corollary 24.5, |f| c(S, T) for all cuts (S, T). The

condition |f| = c(S, T) thus implies that f is a maximum flow.

The basic Ford-Fulkerson algorithm

Each iteration of the Ford-Fulkerson method finds some augmenting
path p and uses p to modify the flow f. As Lemma 24.2 and Corollary
24.3 suggest, replacing f by f fp produces a new flow whose value is |f|
+ |fp|. The procedure FORD-FULKERSON on the next page
implements the method by updating the flow attribute (u, v).f for each
edge (u, v) E.1 It assumes implicitly that (u, v).f = 0 if (u, v) E. The
procedure also assumes that the capacities c(u, v) come with the flow
network, and that c(u, v) = 0 if (u, v) E. The procedure computes the
residual capacity cf (u, v) in accordance with the formula (24.2). The
expression cf (p) in the code is just a temporary variable that stores the
residual capacity of the path p.

FORD-FULKERSON (G, s, t)
1 for each edge (u, v) G.E
2 (u, v).f = 0
3 while there exists a path p from s to t in the residual network Gf
4 cf (p) = min {cf (u, v) : (u, v) is in p}

5 for each edge (u, v) in p

6 if (u, v) G.E

7 (u, v).f = (u, v).f + cf (p)

8 else (v, u).f = (v, u).f - cf (p)

9 return f

The FORD-FULKERSON procedure simply expands on the
FORD-FULKERSON-METHOD pseudocode given earlier. Figure
24.6 shows the result of each iteration in a sample run. Lines 12

initialize the flow f to 0. The while loop of lines 38 repeatedly finds an
augmenting path p in Gf and augments flow f along p by the residual
capacity cf (p). Each residual edge in path p is either an edge in the

original network or the reversal of an edge in the original network.
Lines 68 update the flow in each case appropriately, adding flow when
the residual edge is an original edge and subtracting it otherwise. When

no augmenting paths exist, the flow f is a maximum flow.

Analysis of Ford-Fulkerson

The running time of FORD-FULKERSON depends on the augmenting

path p and how it's found in line 3. If the edge capacities are irrational

numbers, it's possible to choose the augmenting path so that the
algorithm never terminates: the value of the flow increases with
successive augmentations, but never converges to the maximum flow
value. The good news is that if the algorithm finds the augmenting path
by using a breadth-first search (which we saw in Section 20.2), it runs in
polynomial time. Before proving this result, we obtain a simple bound
for the case in which all capacities are integers and the algorithm finds
any augmenting path.

Figure 24.6 The execution of the basic Ford-Fulkerson algorithm. (a)(e) Successive iterations

of the while loop. The left side of each part shows the residual network Gf from line 3 with a
blue augmenting path p. The right side of each part shows the new flow f that results from
augmenting f by fp. The residual network in (a) is the input flow network G. (f) The residual
network at the last while loop test. It has no augmenting paths, and the flow f shown in (e) is

therefore a maximum flow. The value of the maximum flow found is 23.

Figure 24.7 (a) A flow network for which FORD-FULKERSON can take (E | f*|) time,
where f* is a maximum flow, shown here with |f*| = 2,000,000. The blue path is an augmenting

path with residual capacity 1. (b) The resulting residual network, with another augmenting
path whose residual capacity is 1. (c) The resulting residual network.

In practice, the maximum-flow problem often arises with integer

capacities. If the capacities are rational numbers, an appropriate scaling

transformation can make them all integers. If f* denotes a maximum

flow in the transformed network, then a straightforward

implementation of FORD-FULKERSON executes the while loop of

lines 38 at most |f*| times, since the flow value increases by at least 1

unit in each iteration.

A good implementation should perform the work done within the

while loop efficiently. It should represent the flow network G = (V, E)

with the right data structure and find an augmenting path by a linear-

time algorithm. Let's assume that the implementation keeps a data

structure corresponding to a directed graph G = (V, E), where E =
{(u, v) : (u, v) E or (v, u) E}. Edges in the network G are also edges
in G, making it straightforward to maintain capacities and flows in this
data structure. Given a flow f on G, the edges in the residual network Gf
consist of all edges (u, v) of G such that cf (u, v) > 0, where cf conforms

to equation (24.2). The time to find a path in a residual network is

therefore O(V + E) = O(E) using either depth-first search or breadthfirst search. Each iteration of the while loop thus takes O(E) time, as

does the initialization in lines 12, making the total running time of the

FORD-FULKERSON algorithm O(E |f*|).
When the capacities are integers and the optimal flow value |f*| is

small, the running time of the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm is good. Figure

24.7(a) shows an example of what can happen on a simple flow network

for which |f*| is large. A maximum flow in this network has value
2,000,000: 1,000,000 units of flow traverse the path s u t, and
another 1,000,000 units traverse the path s v t. If the first
augmenting path found by FORD-FULKERSON is s u v t,

shown in Figure 24.7(a), the flow has value 1 after the first iteration.
The resulting residual network appears in Figure 24.7(b). If the second

iteration finds the augmenting path s v u t, as shown in Figure

24.7(b), the flow then has value 2. Figure 24.7(c) shows the resulting
residual network. If the algorithm continues alternately choosing the

augmenting paths s u v t and s v u t, it performs a total

of 2,000,000 augmentations, increasing the flow value by only 1 unit in
each.

The Edmonds-Karp algorithm

In the example of Figure 24.7, the algorithm never chooses the
augmenting path with the fewest edges. It should have. By using
breadth-first search to find an augmenting path in the residual network,
the algorithm runs in polynomial time, independent of the maximum
flow value. We call the Ford-Fulkerson method so implemented the

Edmonds-Karp algorithm.
Let's now prove that the Edmonds-Karp algorithm runs in O(VE2)

time. The analysis depends on the distances to vertices in the residual

network Gf. The notation f (u, v) denotes the shortest-path distance
from u to v in Gf, where each edge has unit distance.

Lemma 24.7
If the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is run on a flow network G = (V, E)
with source s and sink t, then for all vertices v V - {s, t}, the shortestpath distance f (s, v) in the residual network Gf increases

monotonically with each flow augmentation.

Proof We'll suppose that a flow augmentation occurs that causes the
shortest-path distance from s to some vertex v V - {s, t} to decrease
and then derive a contradiction. Let f be the flow just before an
augmentation that decreases some shortest-path distance, and let f be

the flow just afterward. Let v be a vertex with the minimum f (s, v)
whose distance was decreased by the augmentation, so that f (s, v) <
f (s, v). Let p = s u v be a shortest path from s to v in Gf, so that
(u, v) Ef and

Because of how we chose v, we know that the distance of vertex u from
the source s did not decrease, that is,

We claim that (u, v) Ef. Why? If we have (u, v) Ef, then we also have

f (s, v) f (s, u) + 1 (by Lemma 22.10, the triangle inequality)
f (s, u) + 1 (by inequality (24.12))
= f (s, v) (by equation (24.11)),

which contradicts our assumption that f (s, v) < f (s, v).
How can we have (u, v) Ef and (u, v) Ef? The augmentation must

have increased the flow from v to u, so that edge (v, u) was in the
augmenting path. The augmenting path was a shortest path from s to t
in Gf, and since any subpath of a shortest path is itself a shortest path,
this augmenting path includes a shortest path from s to u in Gf that has
(v, u) as its last edge. Therefore,

f (s, v) = f (s, u) - 1
f (s, u) - 1 (by inequality (24.12))
= f (s, v) - 2 (by equation (24.11)),

so that f (s, v) > f (s, v), contradicting our assumption that f (s, v) <
f (s, v). We conclude that our assumption that such a vertex v exists is

incorrect.

The next theorem bounds the number of iterations of the EdmondsKarp algorithm.

Theorem 24.8
If the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is run on a flow network G = (V, E)
with source s and sink t, then the total number of flow augmentations
performed by the algorithm is O(VE).

Proof We say that an edge (u, v) in a residual network Gf is critical on
an augmenting path p if the residual capacity of p is the residual
capacity of (u, v), that is, if cf (p) = cf (u, v). After flow is augmented

along an augmenting path, any critical edge on the path disappears
from the residual network. Moreover, at least one edge on any

augmenting path must be critical. We'll show that each of the |E| edges
can become critical at most |V|/2 times.

Let u and v be vertices in V that are connected by an edge in E. Since
augmenting paths are shortest paths, when (u, v) is critical for the first

time, we have

f (s, v) = f (s, u) + 1.

Once the flow is augmented, the edge (u, v) disappears from the residual

network. It cannot reappear later on another augmenting path until

after the flow from u to v is decreased, which occurs only if (v, u)
appears on an augmenting path. If f is the flow in G when this event

occurs, then we have

f (s, u) = f (s, v) + 1.

Since f (s, v) f (s, v) by Lemma 24.7, we have

f (s, u) = f (s, v) + 1
f (s, v) + 1
= f (s, u) + 2.

Consequently, from the time (u, v) becomes critical to the time when
it next becomes critical, the distance of u from the source increases by

at least 2. The distance of u from the source is initially at least 0.
Because edge (u, v) is on an augmenting path, and augmenting paths
end at t, we know that u cannot be t, so that in any residual network
that has a path from s to u, the shortest such path has at most |V| - 2
edges. Thus, after the first time that (u, v) becomes critical, it can
become critical at most (|V| - 2)/2 = |V|/2 - 1 times more, for a total of
at most |V|/2 times. Since there are O(E) pairs of vertices that can have

an edge between them in a residual network, the total number of critical
edges during the entire execution of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is

O(VE). Each augmenting path has at least one critical edge, and hence

the theorem follows.

Because each iteration of FORD-FULKERSON takes O(E) time

when it uses breadth-first search to find the augmenting path, the total

running time of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is O(VE2).

Exercises

24.2-1

Prove that the summations in equation (24.6) equal the summations on
the right-hand side of equation (24.5).

24.2-2
In Figure 24.1(b), what is the net flow across the cut ({s, v2, v4}, {v1, v3,
t})? What is the capacity of this cut?

24.2-3

Show the execution of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm on the flow
network of Figure 24.1(a).

24.2-4

In the example of Figure 24.6, what is the minimum cut corresponding
to the maximum flow shown? Of the augmenting paths appearing in the
example, which one cancels flow?

24.2-5

The construction in Section 24.1 to convert a flow network with
multiple sources and sinks into a single-source, single-sink network
adds edges with infinite capacity. Prove that any flow in the resulting
network has a finite value if the edges of the original network with
multiple sources and sinks have finite capacity.

24.2-6
Suppose that each source si in a flow network with multiple sources and
sinks produces exactly pi units of flow, so that vV f (si, v) = pi.
Suppose also that each sink tj consumes exactly qj units, so that vV f
(v, tj) = qj, where i pi = j qj. Show how to convert the problem of
finding a flow f that obeys these additional constraints into the problem

of finding a maximum flow in a single-source, single-sink flow network.

24.2-7

Prove Lemma 24.2.

24.2-8
Suppose that we redefine the residual network to disallow edges into s.

Argue that the procedure FORD-FULKERSON still correctly
computes a maximum flow.

24.2-9
Suppose that both f and f are flows in a flow network. Does the
augmented flow f f satisfy the flow conservation property? Does it

satisfy the capacity constraint?

24.2-10
Show how to find a maximum flow in a flow network G = (V, E) by a
sequence of at most |E| augmenting paths. (Hint: Determine the paths
after finding the maximum flow.)

24.2-11
The edge connectivity of an undirected graph is the minimum number k

of edges that must be removed to disconnect the graph. For example,
the edge connectivity of a tree is 1, and the edge connectivity of a cyclic

chain of vertices is 2. Show how to determine the edge connectivity of

an undirected graph G = (V, E) by running a maximum-flow algorithm
on at most |V| flow networks, each having O(V + E) vertices and O(E)

edges.

24.2-12
You are given a flow network G, where G contains edges entering the
source s. Let f be a flow in G with |f| 0 in which one of the edges (v, s)
entering the source has f (v, s) = 1. Prove that there must exist another
flow f with f (v, s) = 0 such that |f| = |f|. Give an O(E)-time algorithm
to compute f, given f and assuming that all edge capacities are integers.

24.2-13

Suppose that you wish to find, among all minimum cuts in a flow

network G with integer capacities, one that contains the smallest
number of edges. Show how to modify the capacities of G to create a
new flow network G in which any minimum cut in G is a minimum cut
with the smallest number of edges in G.