25.3 The Hungarian algorithm for the assignment problem

Let us once again add some information to a complete bipartite graph

G = (V, E), where V = L R. This time, instead of having the vertices of

each side rank the vertices on the other side, we assign a weight to each

edge. Again, let's assume that the vertex sets L and R each contain n
vertices, so that the graph contains n2 edges. For l L and r R,
denote the weight of edge (l, r) by w(l, r), which represents the utility
gained by matching vertex l with vertex r.

The goal is to find a perfect matching M* (see Exercises 25.1-5 and

25.1-6) whose edges have the maximum total weight over all perfect

matchings. That is, letting w(M) = (l,r)M w(l, r) denote the total
weight of the edges in matching M, we want to find a perfect matching
M* such that

w(M*) = max {w(M) : M is a perfect matching}.

We call finding such a maximum-weight perfect matching the

assignment problem. A solution to the assignment problem is a perfect

matching that maximizes the total utility. Like the stable-marriage
problem, the assignment problem finds a matching that is "good," but
with a different definition of good: maximizing total value rather than
achieving stability.

Although you could enumerate all n! perfect matchings to solve the

assignment problem, an algorithm known as the Hungarian algorithm
solves it much faster. This section will prove an O(n4) time bound, and

Problem 25-2 asks you to refine the algorithm to reduce the running

time to O(n3). Instead of working with the complete bipartite graph G,
the Hungarian algorithm works with a subgraph of G called the

"equality subgraph." The equality subgraph, which is defined below,
changes over time and has the beneficial property that any perfect
matching in the equality subgraph is also an optimal solution to the
assignment problem.

The equality subgraph depends on assigning an attribute h to each
vertex. We call h the label of a vertex, and we say that h is a feasible
vertex labeling of G if

l.h + r.h w(l, r) for all l L and r R.

A feasible vertex labeling always exists, such as the default vertex
labeling given by

Given a feasible vertex labeling h, the equality subgraph Gh = (V, Eh) of
G consists of the same vertices as G and the subset of edges
Eh = {(l, r) E : l.h + r.h = w(l, r)}.

The following theorem ties together a perfect matching in an
equality subgraph and an optimal solution to the assignment problem.

Theorem 25.14
Let G = (V, E), where V = L R, be a complete bipartite graph where
each edge (l, r) E has weight w(l, r). Let h be a feasible vertex labeling
of G and Gh be the equality subgraph of G. If Gh contains a perfect
matching M*, then M* is an optimal solution to the assignment
problem on G.
Proof If Gh contains a perfect matching M*, then because Gh and G
have the same sets of vertices, M* is also a perfect matching in G.
Because each edge of M* belongs to Gh and each vertex has exactly

one incident edge from any perfect matching, we have

Letting M be any perfect matching in G, we have

Thus, we have

so that M* is a maximum-weight perfect matching in G.

The goal now becomes finding a perfect matching in an equality
subgraph. Which equality subgraph? It does not matter! We have free
rein to not only choose an equality subgraph, but to change which

equality subgraph we choose as we go along. We just need to find some
perfect matching in some equality subgraph.

To understand the equality subgraph better, consider again the

proof of Theorem 25.14 and, in the second half, let M be any matching.

The proof is still valid, in particular, inequality (25.3): the weight of any
matching is always at most the sum of the vertex labels. If we choose
any set of vertex labels that define an equality subgraph, then a
maximum-cardinality matching in this equality subgraph has total value
at most the sum of the vertex labels. If the set of vertex labels is the

"right" one, then it will have total value equal to w(M*), and a

maximum-cardinality matching in the equality subgraph is also a
maximum-weight perfect matching. The Hungarian algorithm
repeatedly modifies the matching and the vertex labels in order to
achieve this goal.

The Hungarian algorithm starts with any feasible vertex labeling h
and any matching M in the equality subgraph Gh. It repeatedly finds an
M-augmenting path P in Gh and, using Lemma 25.1, updates the
matching to be M P, thereby incrementing the size of the matching.
As long as there is some equality subgraph that contains an M-

augmenting path, the size of the matching can increase, until a perfect
matching is achieved.

Four questions arise:

1. What initial feasible vertex labeling should the algorithm start
with? Answer: the default vertex labeling given by equations
(25.1) and (25.2).

2. What initial matching in Gh should the algorithm start with?

Short answer: any matching, even an empty matching, but a
greedy maximal matching works well.

3. If an M-augmenting path exists in Gh, how to find it? Short

answer: use a variant of breadth-first search similar to the
second phase of the procedure used in the Hopcroft-Karp

algorithm to find a maximal set of shortest M-augmenting paths.

4. What if the search for an M-augmenting path fails? Short

answer: update the feasible vertex labeling to bring in at least
one new edge.

We'll elaborate on the short answers using the example that starts in

Figure 25.4. Here, L = {l1, l2, ... , l7} and R = {r1, r2, ... , r7}. The edge
weights appear in the matrix shown in part (a), where the weight w(li, rj)
appears in row i and column j. The feasible vertex labels, given by the

default vertex labeling, appear to the left of and above the matrix.

Matrix entries in red indicate edges (li, rj) for which li.h + rj.h = w(li, rj),
that is, edges in the equality subgraph Gh appearing in part (b) of the

figure.

Greedy maximal bipartite matching

There are several ways to implement a greedy method to find a maximal
bipartite matching. The procedure GREEDY-BIPARTITEMATCHING shows one. Edges in Figure 25.4(b) highlighted in blue

indicate the initial greedy maximal matching in Gh. Exercise 25.3-2 asks

you to show that the GREEDY-BIPARTITE-MATCHING procedure
returns a matching that is at least half the size of a maximum matching.

GREEDY-BIPARTITE-MATCHING (G)

1 M=Ø

2 for each vertex l L

3 if l has an unmatched neighbor in R

4 choose any such unmatched neighbor r R

5 M = M {(l, r)}

6 return M

Figure 25.4 The start of the Hungarian algorithm. (a) The matrix of edge weights for a

bipartite graph with L = {l1, l2, ... , l7}. The value in row i and column j indicates w(li, rj).

Feasible vertex labels appear above and next to the matrix. Red entries correspond to edges in

the equality subgraph. (b) The equality subgraph Gh. Edges highlighted in blue belong to the
initial greedy maximal matching M. Blue vertices are matched, and tan vertices are
unmatched. (c) The directed equality subgraph GM,h created from Gh by directing edges in M
from R to L and all other edges from L to R.

Finding an M-augmenting path in Gh

To find an M-augmenting path in the equality subgraph Gh with a
matching M, the Hungarian algorithm first creates the directed equality
subgraph GM,h from Gh, just as the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm creates
GM from G. As in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, you can think of an
M-augmenting path as starting from an unmatched vertex in L, ending

at an unmatched vertex in R, taking unmatched edges from L to R, and
taking matched edges from R to L. Thus, GM,h = (V, EM,h), where

EM,h={(l, r) : l L, r R, and (l, r) Eh - M }(edges from L to R)
{(r, l) : r R, l L, and (l, r) M } (edges from R to L).

Because an M-augmenting path in the directed equality subgraph GM.h
is also an M-augmenting path in the equality subgraph Gh, it suffices to
find M-augmenting paths in GM.h. Figure 25.4(c) shows the directed
equality subgraph GM,h corresponding to the equality subgraph Gh
and matching M from part (b) of the figure.

With the directed equality subgraph GM,h in hand, the Hungarian
algorithm searches for an M-augmenting path from any unmatched
vertex in L to any unmatched vertex in R. Any exhaustive graph-search

method suffices. Here, we'll use breadth-first search, starting from all

the unmatched vertices in L (just as the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm does
when creating the dag H), but stopping upon first discovering some
unmatched vertex in R. Figure 25.5 shows the idea. To start from all the
unmatched vertices in L, initialize the first-in, first-out queue with all
the unmatched vertices in L, rather than just one source vertex. Unlike
the dag H in the Hopcroft-Karp algorithm, here each vertex needs just
one predecessor, so that the breadth-first search creates a breadth-first
forest F = (VF, EF). Each unmatched vertex in L is a root in F.

In Figure 25.5(g), the breadth-first search has found the Maugmenting path (l4, r2), (r2, l1), (l1, r3), (r3, l6), (l6, r5). Figure

25.6(a) shows the new matching created by taking the symmetric

difference of the matching M in Figure 25.5(a) with this M-augmenting

path.

When the search for an M-augmenting path fails

Having updated the matching M from an M-augmenting path, the
Hungarian algorithm updates the directed equality subgraph GM,h

according to the new matching and then starts a new breadth-first

search from all the unmatched vertices in L. Figure 25.6 shows the start

of this process, picking up from Figure 25.5.

In Figure 25.6(d), the queue contains vertices l4 and l3. Neither of

these vertices has an edge that leaves it, however, so that once these
vertices are removed from the queue, the queue becomes empty. The
search terminates at this point, before discovering an unmatched vertex

in R to yield an M-augmenting path. Whenever this situation occurs,
the most recently discovered vertices must belong to L. Why? Whenever
an unmatched vertex in R is discovered, the search has found an Maugmenting path, and when a matched vertex in R is discovered, it has
an unvisited neighbor in L, which the search can then discover.

Recall that we have the freedom to work with any equality subgraph.
We can change the directed equality subgraph "on the fly," as long we
do not counteract the work already done. The Hungarian algorithm

updates the feasible vertex labeling h to fulfill the following criteria:

1. No edge in the breadth-first forest F leaves the directed equality

subgraph.

2. No edge in the matching M leaves the directed equality

subgraph.

3. At least one edge (l, r), where l L VF and r R - VF goes
into Eh, and hence into EM,h. Therefore, at least one vertex in R

will be newly discovered.

Thus, at least one new edge enters the directed equality subgraph, and
any edge that leaves the directed equality subgraph belongs to neither

the matching M nor the breadth-first forest F. Newly discovered
vertices in R are enqueued, but their distances are not necessarily 1
greater than the distances of the most recently discovered vertices in L.

Figure 25.5 Finding an M-augmenting path in GM,h by breadth-first search. (a) The directed
equality subgraph GM,h from Figure 25.4(c). (b)(g) Successive versions of the breadth-first
forest F, shown as the vertices at each distance from the roots--the unmatched vertices in L--

are discovered. In parts (b)(f), the layer of vertices closest to the bottom of the figure are

those in the first-in, first-out queue. For example, in part (b), the queue contains the roots l4,
l5, l7, and in part (e), the queue contains r3, r4, at distance 3 from the roots. In part (g), the
unmatched vertex r5 is discovered, so the breadth-first search terminates. The path (l4, r2),
(r2, l1), (l1, r3), (r3, l6), (l6, r5), highlighted in orange in parts (a) and (g), is an Maugmenting path. Taking its symmetric difference with the matching M yields a new matching
with one more edge than M.

Figure 25.6 (a) The new matching M and the new directed equality subgraph GM.h after
updating the matching in Figure 25.5(a) with the M-augmenting path in Figure 25.5(g). (b)
(d) Successive versions of the breadth-first forest F in a new breadth-first search with roots l5
and l7. After the vertices l4 and l3 in part (d) have been removed from the queue, the queue
becomes empty before the search can discover an unmatched vertex in R.

To update the feasible vertex labeling, the Hungarian algorithm first
computes the value

where FL = L VF and FR = R VF denote the vertices in the
breadth-first forest F that belong to L and R, respectively. That is, is
the smallest difference by which an edge incident on a vertex in FL
missed being in the current equality subgraph Gh. The Hungarian
algorithm then creates a new feasible vertex labeling, say h, by
subtracting from l.h for all vertices l FL and adding to r.h for all
vertices r FR:

The following lemma shows that these changes achieve the three criteria
above.

Lemma 25.15
Let h be a feasible vertex labeling for the complete bipartite graph G
with equality subgraph Gh, and let M be a matching for Gh and F be a

breadth-first forest being constructed for the directed equality

subgraph GM,h. Then, the labeling h in equation (25.5) is a feasible
vertex labeling for G with the following properties:

1. If (u, v) is an edge in the breadth-first forest F for GM,h, then (u,
v) EM,h.

2. If (l, r) belongs to the matching M for Gh, then (r, l) EM,h.

3. There exist vertices l FL and r R - FR such that (l, r)
EM,h but (l, r) EM,h.

Proof We first show that h is a feasible vertex labeling for G. Because h
is a feasible vertex labeling, we have l.h + r.h w(l, r) for all l L and r
R. In order for h to not be a feasible vertex labeling, we would need l.h
+ r.h < l.h + r.h for some l L and r R. The only way this could occur
would be for some l FL and r R - FR. In this instance, the amount
of the decrease equals , so that l.h + r.h = l.h - + r.h. By equation
(25.4), we have that l.h-+r.h w(l, r) for any l FL and r R-FR, so
that l.h+r.h w(l, r). For all other edges, we have l.h + r.h l.h+r.h
w(l, r). Thus, h is a feasible vertex labeling.

Now we show that each of the three desired properties holds:

1. If l FL and r FR, then we have l.h+r.h = l.h+r.h because is
added to the label of l and subtracted from the label of r.

Therefore, if an edge belongs to F for the directed graph GM,h,
it also belongs to GM,h.

2. We claim that at the time the Hungarian algorithm computes the

new feasible vertex labeling h, for every edge (l, r) M, we have
l FL if and only if r FR. To see why, consider a matched
vertex r and let (l, r) M. First suppose that r FR, so that the
search discovered r and enqueued it. When r was removed from
the queue, l was discovered, so l FL. Now suppose that r FR,
so r is undiscovered. We will show that l FL. The only edge in
GM,h that enters l is (r, l), and since r is undiscovered, the search
has not taken this edge; if l FL, it is not because of the edge (r,
l). The only other way that a vertex in L can be in FL is if it is a
root of the search, but only unmatched vertices in L are roots
and l is matched. Thus, l FL, and the claim is proved.

We already saw that l FL and r FR implies l.h + r.h = l.h +
r.h. For the opposite case, when l L - FL and R R - FR, we
have that l.h = l.h and r.h = r.h, so that again l.h + r.h = l.h +
r.h. Thus, if edge (l, r) is in the matching M for the equality
graph Gh, then (r, l) EM,h.

3. Let (l, r) be an edge not in Eh such that l FL, r R - FR, and
= l.h + r.h - w(l, r). By the definition of , there is at least one

such edge. Then, we have

l.h + r.h=l.h - + r.h
=l.h - (l.h + r.h - w(l, r)) + r.h
=w(l, r),

and thus (l, r) Eh. Since (l, r) is not in Eh, it is not in the
matching M, so that in EM,h it must be directed from L to R.
Thus, (l, r) EM,h.

It is possible for an edge to belong to EM,h but not to EM,h. By
Lemma 25.15, any such edge belongs neither to the matching M nor to
the breadth-first forest F at the time that the new feasible vertex
labeling h is computed. (See Exercise 25.3-3.)

Going back to Figure 25.6(d), the queue became empty before an

M-augmenting path was found. Figure 25.7 shows the next steps taken
by the algorithm. The value of = 1 is achieved by the edge (l5, r3)
because in Figure 25.4(a), l5.h + r3.h - w(l5, r3) = 6 + 0 - 5 = 1. In
Figure 25.7(a), the values of l3.h, l4.h, l5.h, and l7.h have decreased by 1
and the values of r2.h and r7.h have increased by 1 because these
vertices are in F. As a result, the edges (l1, r2) and (l6, r7) leave GM,h
and the edge (l5, r3) enters. Figure 25.7(b) shows the new directed
equality subgraph GM,h. With edge (l5, r3) now in GM,h, Figure 25.7(c)
shows that this edge is added to the breadth-first forest F, and r3 is

added to the queue. Parts (c)(f) show the breadth-first forest

continuing to be built until in part (f), the queue once again becomes

empty after vertex l2, which has no edges leaving, is removed. Again,

the algorithm must update the feasible vertex labeling and the directed

equality subgraph. Now the value of = 1 is achieved by three edges:

(l1, r6), (l5, r6), and (l7, r6).
As Figure 25.8 shows in parts (a) and (b), these edges enter GM,h,

and edge (l6, r3) leaves. Part (c) shows that edge (l1, r6) is added to the
breadth-first forest. (Either of edges (l5, r6) or (l7, r6) could have been
added instead.) Because r6 is unmatched, the search has found the M-

augmenting path (l5, r3), (r3, l1), (l1, r6), highlighted in orange.
Figure 25.9(a) shows GM,h after the matching M has been updated

by taking its symmetric difference with the M-augmenting path. The
Hungarian algorithm starts its last breadth-first search, with vertex l7

as the only root. The search proceeds as shown in parts (b)(h) of the

figure, until the queue becomes empty after removing l4. This time, we
find that = 2, achieved by the five edges (l2, r5), (l3, r1), (l4, r5), (l5,

r1), and (l5, r5), each of which enters GM,h. Figure 25.10(a) shows the
results of decreasing the feasible vertex label of each vertex in FL by 2
and increasing the feasible vertex label of each vertex in FR by 2, and
Figure 25.10(b) shows the resulting directed equality subgraph GM,h.
Part (c) shows that edge (l3, r1) is added to the breadth-first forest.
Since r1 is an unmatched vertex, the search terminates, having found
the M-augmenting path (l7, r7), (r7, l3), (l3, r1), highlighted in orange.
If r1 had been matched, vertex r5 would also have been added to the
breadth-first forest, with any of l2, l4, or l5 as its parent.

Figure 25.7 Updating the feasible vertex labeling and the directed equality subgraph GM,h
when the queue becomes empty before finding an M-augmenting path. (a) With = 1, the
values of l3.h, l4.h, l5.h, and l7.h decreased by 1 and r2.h and r7.h increased by 1. Edges (l1,
r2) and (l6, r7) leave GM,h, and edge (l5, r3) enters. These changes are highlighted in yellow.
(b) The resulting directed equality subgraph GM,h. (c)(f) With edge (l5, r3) added to the
breadth-first forest and r3 added to the queue, the breadth-first search continues until the

queue once again becomes empty in part (f).

After updating the matching M, the algorithm arrives at the perfect
matching shown for the equality subgraph Gh in Figure 25.11. By
Theorem 25.14, the edges in M form an optimal solution to the original
assignment problem given in the matrix. Here, the weights of edges (l1,
r6), (l2, r4), (l3, r1), (l4, r2), (l5, r3), (l6, r5), and (l7, r7) sum to 65,

which is the maximum weight of any matching.

The weight of the maximum-weight matching equals the sum of all

the feasible vertex labels. These problems--maximizing the weight of a

matching and minimizing the sum of the feasible vertex labels--are

"duals" of each other, in a similar vein to how the value of a maximum

flow equals the capacity of a minimum cut. Section 29.3 explores duality

in more depth.

Figure 25.8 Another update to the feasible vertex labeling and directed equality subgraph

GM,h because the queue became empty before finding an M-augmenting path. (a) With = 1,
the values of l1.h, l2.h, l3.h, l4.h, l5.h, and l7.h decrease by 1, and r2.h, r3.h, r4.h, and r7.h
increase by 1. Edge (l6, r3) leaves GM,h, and edges (l1, r6), (l5, r6) and (l7, r6) enter. (b) The
resulting directed equality subgraph GM,h. (c) With edge (l1, r6) added to the breadth-first
forest and r6 unmatched, the search terminates, having found the M-augmenting path (l5, r3),
(r3, l1), (l1, r6), highlighted in orange in parts (b) and (c).

The Hungarian algorithm

The procedure HUNGARIAN on page 737 and its subroutine FINDAUGMENTING-PATH on page 738 follow the steps we have just seen.
The third property in Lemma 25.15 ensures that in line 23 of FIND-

AUGMENTING-PATH the queue Q is nonempty. The pseudocode
uses the attribute to indicate predecessor vertices in the breadth-first

forest. Instead of coloring vertices, as in the BFS procedure on page

556, the search puts the discovered vertices into the sets FL and FR.

Because the Hungarian algorithm does not need breadth-first distances,

the pseudocode omits the d attribute computed by the BFS procedure.

Figure 25.9 (a) The new matching M and the new directed equality subgraph GM,h after
updating the matching in Figure 25.8 with the M-augmenting path in Figure 25.8 parts (b)
and (c). (b)(h) Successive versions of the breadth-first forest F in a new breadth-first search
with root l7. After the vertex l4 in part (h) has been removed from the queue, the queue
becomes empty before the search discovers an unmatched vertex in R.

Now, let's see why the Hungarian algorithm runs in O(n4) time,
where |V| = n/2 and |E| = n2 in the original graph G. (Below we outline
how to reduce the running time to O(n3).) You can go through the

pseudocode of HUNGARIAN to verify that lines 16 and 11 take

O(n2) time. The while loop of lines 710 iterates at most n times, since
each iteration increases the size of the matching M by 1. Each test in
line 7 can take constant time by just checking whether |M| < n, each
update of M in line 9 takes O(n) time, and the updates in line 10 take

O(n2) time.

To achieve the O(n4) time bound, it remains to show that each call of

FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH runs in O(n3) time. Let's call each
execution of lines 1022 a growth step. Ignoring the growth steps, you

can verify that FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH is a breadth-first search.

With the sets FL and FR represented appropriately, the breadth-first

search takes O(V + E) = O(n2) time. Within a call of FINDAUGMENTING-PATH, at most n growth steps can occur, since each
growth step is guaranteed to discover at least one vertex in R. Since

there are at most n2 edges in GM,h, the for loop of lines 1622 iterates

at most n2 times per call of FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH. The

bottleneck is lines 10 and 15, which take O(n2) time, so that FIND-

AUGMENTING-PATH takes O(n3) time.

Figure 25.10 Updating the feasible vertex labeling and directed equality subgraph GM,h. (a)
Here, = 2, so the values of l1.h, l2.h, l3.h, l4.h, l5.h, and l7.h decreased by 2, and the values
of r2.h, r3.h, r4.h, r6.h, and r7.h increased by 2. Edges (l2, r5), (l3, r1), (l4, r5), (l5, r1), and
(l5, r5) enter GM,h. (b) The resulting directed graph GM,h. (c) With edge (l3, r1) added to the
breadth-first forest and r1 unmatched, the search terminates, having found the M-augmenting
path (l7, r7), (r7, l3), (l3, r1), highlighted in orange in parts (b) and (c).

Exercise 25.3-5 asks you to show that reconstructing the directed

equality subgraph GM,h in line 15 is actually unnecessary, so that its

cost can be eliminated. Reducing the cost of computing in line 10 to

O(n) takes a little more effort and is the subject of Problem 25-2. With
these changes, each call of FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH takes O(n2)
time, so that the Hungarian algorithm runs in O(n3) time.

Figure 25.11 The final matching, shown for the equality subgraph Gh with blue edges and blue

entries in the matrix. The weights of the edges in the matching sum to 65, which is the

maximum for any matching in the original complete bipartite graph G, as well as the sum of all

the final feasible vertex labels.

HUNGARIAN (G)

1for each vertex l L

2 l.h = max {w(l, r) : r R} // from equation (25.1)

3for each vertex r R

4 r.h = 0 // from equation (25.2)

5let M be any matching in Gh (such as the matching returned by

GREEDY-BIPARTITE-MATCHING)

6from G, M, and h, form the equality subgraph Gh
and the directed equality subgraph GM,h

7while M is not a perfect matching in Gh
8 P = FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH (GM,h)
9 M=MP

10 update the equality subgraph Gh
and the directed equality subgraph GM,h

11return M

FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH (GM,h)

1Q = Ø

2FL = Ø

3FR = Ø

4for each unmatched vertex l L

5 l. = NIL

6 ENQUEUE (Q, l)

7 FL = FL {l} // forest F starts with unmatched
vertices in L

8 repeat

9 if Q is empty // ran out of vertices to search from?

10 = min {l.h + r.h - w(l, r) : l FL and r R - FR}

11 for each vertex l FL

12 l.h = l.h - // relabel according to equation

(25.5)

13 for each vertex r FR

14 r.h = r.h + // relabel according to equation

(25.5)

15 from G, M, and h, form a new directed equality graph GM,h

16 for each new edge (l, // continue search with

r) in GM,h new edges

17 if r FR

18 r. = l // discover r, add it to

F

19 if r is unmatched

20 an M-augmenting path has been found

20 (exit the repeat loop)

21 else ENQUEUE // can search from r

(Q, r) later

22 FR = FR {r}

23 u = DEQUEUE (Q) // search from u

24 for each neighbor v of u in GM,h

25 if v L

26 v. = u

27 FL = FL {v} // discover v, add it to
F

28 ENQUEUE (Q, v) // can search from v

later

29 elseif v FR // v R, do same as

lines 1822

30 v. = u

31 if v is unmatched

32 an M-augmenting path has been found

(exit the repeat loop)

33 else ENQUEUE (Q, v)

34 FR = FR {v}

35until an M-augmenting path has been found

36using the predecessor attributes , construct an M-augmenting path

P by tracing back from the unmatched vertex in R

37return P

Exercises

25.3-1

The FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH procedure checks in two places

(lines 19 and 31) whether a vertex it discovers in R is unmatched. Show

how to rewrite the pseudocode so that it checks for an unmatched

vertex in R in only one place. What is the downside of doing so?

25.3-2

Show that for any bipartite graph, the GREEDY-BIPARTITEMATCHING procedure on page 726 returns a matching at least half
the size of a maximum matching.

25.3-3
Show that if an edge (l, r) belongs to the directed equality subgraph
GM,h but is not a member of GM,h, where h is given by equation
(25.5), then l L - FL and r FR at the time that h is computed.

25.3-4

At line 29 in the FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH procedure, it has

already been established that v R. This line checks to see whether v is
already discovered by testing whether v FR. Why doesn't the
procedure need to check whether v is already discovered for the case
when v L, in lines 2628?

25.3-5
Professor Hrabosky asserts that the directed equality subgraph GM,h

must be constructed and maintained by the Hungarian algorithm, so
that line 6 of HUNGARIAN and line 15 of FIND-AUGMENTINGPATH are required. Argue that the professor is incorrect by showing

how to determine whether an edge belongs to EM,h without explicitly
constructing GM,h.

25.3-6

How can you modify the Hungarian algorithm to find a matching of

vertices in L to vertices in R that minimizes, rather than maximizes, the

sum of the edge weights in the matching?

25.3-7
How can an assignment problem with |L| |R| be modified so that the

Hungarian algorithm solves it?

Problems

25-1 Perfect matchings in a regular bipartite graph

a. Problem 20-3 asked about Euler tours in directed graphs. Prove that a
connected, undirected graph G = (V, E) has an Euler tour--a cycle

traversing each edge exactly once, though it may visit a vertex

multiple times--if and only if the degree of every vertex in V is even.

b. Assuming that G is connected, undirected, and every vertex in V has
even degree, give an O(E)-time algorithm to find an Euler tour of G,

as in Problem 20-3(b).

c. Exercise 25.1-6 states that if G = (V, E) is a d-regular bipartite graph,
then it contains d disjoint perfect matchings. Suppose that d is an
exact power of 2. Give an algorithm to find all d disjoint perfect
matchings in a d-regular bipartite graph in (E lg d) time.

25-2 Reducing the running time of the Hungarian algorithm to O(n3)

In this problem, you will show how to reduce the running time of the

Hungarian algorithm from O(n4) to O(n3) by showing how to reduce

the running time of the FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH procedure from

O(n3) to O(n2). Exercise 25.3-5 demonstrates that line 6 of

HUNGARIAN and line 15 of FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH are
unnecessary. Now you will show how to reduce the running time of each

execution of line 10 in FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH to O(n).
For each vertex r R - FR, define a new attribute r. where

r. = min {l.h + r.h - w(l, r) : l FL}.

That is, r. indicates how close r is to being adjacent to some vertex l
FL in the directed equality subgraph Gm,h. Initially, before placing any
vertices into FL, set r. to for all r R.

a. Show how to compute in line 10 in O(n) time, based on the

attribute.

b. Show how to update all the attributes in O(n) time after has been

computed.

c. Show that updating all the attributes when FL changes takes O(n2)

time per call of FIND-AUGMENTING-PATH.

d. Conclude that the HUNGARIAN procedure can be implemented to
run in O(n3) time.

25-3 Other matching problems

The Hungarian algorithm finds a maximum-weight perfect matching in
a complete bipartite graph. It is possible to use the Hungarian
algorithm to solve problems in other graphs by modifying the input
graph, running the Hungarian algorithm, and then possibly modifying
the output. Show how to solve the following matching problems in this
manner.

a. Give an algorithm to find a maximum-weight matching in a weighted

bipartite graph that is not necessarily complete and with all edge
weights positive.

b. Redo part (a), but with edge weights allowed to also be 0 or negative.

c. A cycle cover in a directed graph, not necessarily bipartite, is a set of

edge-disjoint directed cycles such that each vertex lies on at most one

cycle. Given nonnegative edge weights w(u, v), let C be the set of
edges in a cycle cover, and define w(C) = (u,v)C w(u, v) to be the

weight of the cycle cover. Give an algorithm to find a maximum-
weight cycle cover.

25-4 Fractional matchings
It is possible to define a fractional matching. Given a graph G = (V, E),
we define a fractional matching x as a function x : E [0, 1] (real
numbers between 0 and 1, inclusive) such that for every vertex u V,
we have (u,v)E x(u, v) 1. The value of a fractional matching is (u,
v)E x(u, v). The definition of a fractional matching is identical to that

of a matching, except that a matching has the additional constraint that

x(u, v) {0, 1} for all edges (u, v) E. Given a graph, we let M* denote
a maximum matching and x* denote a fractional matching with

maximum value.

a. Argue that, for any bipartite graph, we must have (u, v)E x*(u, v)
|M*|.

b. Prove that, for any bipartite graph, we must have (u, v)E x*(e)
|M*|. (Hint: Give an algorithm that converts a fractional matching

with an integer value to a matching.) Conclude that the maximum
value of a fractional matching in a bipartite graph is the same as the
size of the maximum cardinality matching.

c. We can define a fractional matching in a weighted graph in the same
manner: the value of the matching is now (u, v)E w(u, v) x(u, v).

Extend the results of the previous parts to show that in a weighted
bipartite graph, the maximum value of a weighted fractional matching
is equal to the value of a maximum weighted matching.

d. In a general graph, the analogous results do not necessarily hold.

Give an example of a small graph that is not bipartite for which the
fractional matching with maximum value is not a maximum matching.

25-5 Computing vertex labels
You are given a complete bipartite graph G = (V, E) with edge weights
w(l, r) for all (l, r) E. You are also given a maximum-weight perfect
matching M* for G. You wish to compute a feasible vertex labeling h
such that M* is a perfect matching in the equality subgraph Gh. That is,
you want to compute a labeling h of vertices such that

(Requirement (25.6) holds for all edges, and the stronger requirement

(25.7) holds for all edges in M*.) Give an algorithm to compute the
feasible vertex labeling h, and prove that it is correct. (Hint: Use the

similarity between conditions (25.6) and (25.7) and some of the
properties of shortest paths proved in Chapter 22, in particular the
triangle inequality (Lemma 22.10) and the convergence property
(Lemma 22.14.))

Chapter notes

Matching algorithms have a long history and have been central to many
breakthroughs in algorithm design and analysis. The book by Lovász
and Plummer [306] is an excellent reference on matching problems, and
the chapter on matching in the book by Ahuja, Magnanti and Orlin [10]
also has extensive references.

The Hopcroft-Karp algorithm is by Hopcroft and Karp [224].

Madry [308] gave an Õ(E10/7)-time algorithm, which is asymptotically

faster than Hopcroft-Karp for sparse graphs.
Corollary 25.4 is due to Berge [53], and it also holds in graphs that

are not bipartite. Matching in general graphs requires more
complicated algorithms. The first polynomial-time algorithm, running in

O(V 4) time, is due to Edmonds [130] (in a paper that also introduced

the notion of a polynomial-time algorithm). Like the bipartite case, this
algorithm also uses augmenting paths, although the algorithm for
finding augmenting paths in general graphs is more involved than the

one for bipartite graphs. Subsequently, several -time algorithms

appeared, including ones by Gabow and Tarjan [168] as part of an

algorithm for weighted matching and a simpler one by Gabow [164].

The Hungarian algorithm is described in the book by Bondy and

Murty [67] and is based on work by Kuhn [273] and Munkres [337].

Kuhn adopted the name "Hungarian algorithm" because the algorithm

derived from work by the Hungarian mathematicians D. Knig and J.

Egervéry. The algorithm is an early example of a primal-dual algorithm.

A faster algorithm that runs in time, where the edge

weights are integers from 0 to W, was given by Gabow and Tarjan [167],

and an algorithm with the same time bound for maximum-weight

matching in general graphs was given by Duan, Pettie, and Su [127].

The stable-marriage problem was first defined and analyzed by Gale

and Shapley [169]. The stable-marriage problem has numerous variants.

The books by Gusfield and Irving [203], Knuth [266], and Manlove [313]

serve as excellent sources for cataloging and solving them.

1 The definition of a complete bipartite graph differs from the definition of complete graph

given on page 1167 because in a bipartite graph, there are no edges between vertices in L and
no edges between vertices in R.

2 Although marriage norms are changing, it's traditional to view the stable-marriage problem
through the lens of heterosexual marriage.

Part VII Selected Topics

Introduction

This part contains a selection of algorithmic topics that extend and
complement earlier material in this book. Some chapters introduce new
models of computation such as circuits or parallel computers. Others
cover specialized domains such as matrices or number theory. The last
two chapters discuss some of the known limitations to the design of
efficient algorithms and introduce techniques for coping with those
limitations.

Chapter 26 presents an algorithmic model for parallel computing
based on task-parallel computing, and more specifically, fork-join
parallelism. The chapter introduces the basics of the model, showing
how to quantify parallelism in terms of the measures of work and span.
It then investigates several interesting fork-join algorithms, including
algorithms for matrix multiplication and merge sorting.

An algorithm that receives its input over time, rather than having the
entire input available at the start, is called an "online" algorithm.
Chapter 27 examines techniques used in online algorithms, starting with
the "toy" problem of how long to wait for an elevator before taking the
stairs. It then studies the "move-to-front" heuristic for maintaining a
linked list and finishes with the online version of the caching problem
we saw back in Section 15.4. The analyses of these online algorithms are
remarkable in that they prove that these algorithms, which do not know
their future inputs, perform within a constant factor of optimal
algorithms that know the future inputs.

Chapter 28 studies efficient algorithms for operating on matrices. It
presents two general methods--LU decomposition and LUP
decomposition--for solving linear equations by Gaussian elimination in

O(n3) time. It also shows that matrix inversion and matrix multiplication

can be performed equally fast. The chapter concludes by showing how
to compute a least-squares approximate solution when a set of linear
equations has no exact solution.

Chapter 29 studies how to model problems as linear programs, where
the goal is to maximize or minimize an objective, given limited resources
and competing constraints. Linear programming arises in a variety of
practical application areas. The chapter also addresses the concept of
"duality" which, by establishing that a maximization problem and
minimization problem have the same objective value, helps to show that
solutions to each are optimal.

Chapter 30 studies operations on polynomials and shows how to use
a well-known signal-processing technique--the fast Fourier transform

(FFT)--to multiply two degree-n polynomials in O(n lg n) time. It also

derives a parallel circuit to compute the FFT.
Chapter 31 presents number-theoretic algorithms. After reviewing

elementary number theory, it presents Euclid's algorithm for computing
greatest common divisors. Next, it studies algorithms for solving
modular linear equations and for raising one number to a power
modulo another number. Then, it explores an important application of
number-theoretic algorithms: the RSA public-key cryptosystem. This
cryptosystem can be used not only to encrypt messages so that an
adversary cannot read them, but also to provide digital signatures. The
chapter finishes with the Miller-Rabin randomized primality test, which
enables finding large primes efficiently--an essential requirement for the
RSA system.

Chapter 32 studies the problem of finding all occurrences of a given
pattern string in a given text string, a problem that arises frequently in
text-editing programs. After examining the naive approach, the chapter
presents an elegant approach due to Rabin and Karp. Then, after
showing an efficient solution based on finite automata, the chapter
presents the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, which modifies the

automaton-based algorithm to save space by cleverly preprocessing the
pattern. The chapter finishes by studying suffix arrays, which can not
only find a pattern in a text string, but can do quite a bit more, such as
finding the longest repeated substring in a text and finding the longest
common substring appearing in two texts.

Chapter 33 examines three algorithms within the expansive field of
machine learning. Machine-learning algorithms are designed to take in
vast amounts of data, devise hypotheses about patterns in the data, and

test these hypotheses. The chapter starts with k-means clustering,
which groups data elements into k classes based on how similar they are

to each other. It then shows how to use the technique of multiplicative
weights to make predictions accurately based on a set of "experts" of
varying quality. Perhaps surprisingly, even without knowing which
experts are reliable and which are not, you can predict almost as
accurately as the most reliable expert. The chapter finishes with
gradient descent, an optimization technique that finds a local minimum
value for a function. Gradient descent has many applications, including
finding parameter settings for many machine-learning models.

Chapter 34 concerns NP-complete problems. Many interesting
computational problems are NP-complete, but no polynomial-time
algorithm is known for solving any of them. This chapter presents
techniques for determining when a problem is NP-complete, using them
to prove several classic problems NP-complete: determining whether a
graph has a hamiltonian cycle (a cycle that includes every vertex),
determining whether a boolean formula is satisfiable (whether there
exists an assignment of boolean values to its variables that causes the
formula to evaluate to TRUE), and determining whether a given set of
numbers has a subset that adds up to a given target value. The chapter
also proves that the famous traveling-salesperson problem (find a
shortest route that starts and ends at the same location and visits each
of a set of locations once) is NP-complete.

Chapter 35 shows how to find approximate solutions to NP-complete
problems efficiently by using approximation algorithms. For some NPcomplete problems, approximate solutions that are near optimal are
quite easy to produce, but for others even the best approximation
algorithms known work progressively more poorly as the problem size

increases. Then, there are some problems for which investing increasing
amounts of computation time yields increasingly better approximate
solutions. This chapter illustrates these possibilities with the vertexcover problem (unweighted and weighted versions), an optimization
version of 3-CNF satisfiability, the traveling-salesperson problem, the
set-covering problem, and the subset-sum problem.

26 Parallel Algorithms

The vast majority of algorithms in this book are serial algorithms

suitable for running on a uniprocessor computer that executes only one
instruction at a time. This chapter extends our algorithmic model to

encompass parallel algorithms, where multiple instructions can execute

simultaneously. Specifically, we'll explore the elegant model of taskparallel algorithms, which are amenable to algorithmic design and
analysis. Our study focuses on fork-join parallel algorithms, the most
basic and best understood kind of task-parallel algorithm. Fork-join
parallel algorithms can be expressed cleanly using simple linguistic
extensions to ordinary serial code. Moreover, they can be implemented
efficiently in practice.

Parallel computers--computers with multiple processing units--are
ubiquitous. Handheld, laptop, desktop, and cloud machines are all

multicore computers, or simply, multicores, containing multiple

processing "cores." Each processing core is a full-fledged processor that

can directly access any location in a common shared memory.

Multicores can be aggregated into larger systems, such as clusters, by
using a network to interconnect them. These multicore clusters usually

have a distributed memory, where one multicore's memory cannot be

accessed directly by a processor in another multicore. Instead, the
processor must explicitly send a message over the cluster network to a
processor in the remote multicore to request any data it requires. The
most powerful clusters are supercomputers, comprising many
thousands of multicores. But since shared-memory programming tends

to be conceptually easier than distributed-memory programming, and
multicore machines are widely available, this chapter focuses on parallel
algorithms for multicores.

One approach to programming multicores is thread parallelism. This

processor-centric parallel-programming model employs a software

abstraction of "virtual processors," or threads that share a common

memory. Each thread maintains its own program counter and can
execute code independently of the other threads. The operating system
loads a thread onto a processing core for execution and switches it out
when another thread needs to run.

Unfortunately, programming a shared-memory parallel computer
using threads tends to be difficult and error-prone. One reason is that it
can be complicated to dynamically partition the work among the
threads so that each thread receives approximately the same load. For
any but the simplest of applications, the programmer must use complex
communication protocols to implement a scheduler that load-balances
the work.

Task-parallel programming

The difficulty of thread programming has led to the creation of taskparallel platforms, which provide a layer of software on top of threads

to coordinate, schedule, and manage the processors of a multicore.
Some task-parallel platforms are built as runtime libraries, but others
provide full-fledged parallel languages with compiler and runtime
support.

Task-parallel programming allows parallelism to be specified in a

"processor-oblivious" fashion, where the programmer identifies what
computational tasks may run in parallel but does not indicate which
thread or processor performs the task. Thus, the programmer is freed
from worrying about communication protocols, load balancing, and
other vagaries of thread programming. The task-parallel platform
contains a scheduler, which automatically load-balances the tasks
across the processors, thereby greatly simplifying the programmer's

chore. Task-parallel algorithms provide a natural extension to ordinary

serial algorithms, allowing performance to be reasoned about
mathematically using "work/span analysis."

Fork-join parallelism

Although the functionality of task-parallel environments is still evolving

and increasing, almost all support fork-join parallelism, which is
typically embodied in two linguistic features: spawning and parallel
loops. Spawning allows a subroutine to be "forked": executed like a

subroutine call, except that the caller can continue to execute while the
spawned subroutine computes its result. A parallel loop is like an
ordinary for loop, except that multiple iterations of the loop can
execute at the same time.

Fork-join parallel algorithms employ spawning and parallel loops to

describe parallelism. A key aspect of this parallel model, inherited from
the task-parallel model but different from the thread model, is that the

programmer does not specify which tasks in a computation must run in
parallel, only which tasks may run in parallel. The underlying runtime

system uses threads to load-balance the tasks across the processors.
This chapter investigates parallel algorithms described in the fork-join
model, as well as how the underlying runtime system can schedule taskparallel computations (which include fork-join computations) efficiently.

Fork-join parallelism offers several important advantages:

The fork-join programming model is a simple extension of the
familiar serial programming model used in most of this book. To
describe a fork-join parallel algorithm, the pseudocode in this
book needs just three added keywords: parallel, spawn, and sync.
Deleting these parallel keywords from the parallel pseudocode
results in ordinary serial pseudocode for the same problem, which
we call the "serial projection" of the parallel algorithm.

The underlying task-parallel model provides a theoretically clean
way to quantify parallelism based on the notions of "work" and
"span."

Spawning allows many divide-and-conquer algorithms to be
parallelized naturally. Moreover, just as serial divide-and-conquer

algorithms lend themselves to analysis using recurrences, so do
parallel algorithms in the fork-join model.
The fork-join programming model is faithful to how multicore
programming has been evolving in practice. A growing number of
multicore environments support one variant or another of fork-
join parallel programming, including Cilk [290, 291, 383, 396],
Habanero-Java [466], the Java Fork-Join Framework [279],
OpenMP [81], Task Parallel Library [289], Threading Building
Blocks [376], and X10 [82].

Section 26.1 introduces parallel pseudocode, shows how the
execution of a task-parallel computation can be modeled as a directed
acyclic graph, and presents the metrics of work, span, and parallelism,
which you can use to analyze parallel algorithms. Section 26.2
investigates how to multiply matrices in parallel, and Section 26.3
tackles the tougher problem of designing an efficient parallel merge
sort.