26.1 The basics of fork-join parallelism

Our exploration of parallel programming begins with the problem of
computing Fibonacci numbers recursively in parallel. We'll look at a
straightforward serial Fibonacci calculation, which, although inefficient,
serves as a good illustration of how to express parallelism in
pseudocode.

Recall that the Fibonacci numbers are defined by equation (3.31) on
page 69:

To calculate the nth Fibonacci number recursively, you could use the

ordinary serial algorithm in the procedure FIB on the facing page. You
would not really want to compute large Fibonacci numbers this way,

because this computation does needless repeated work, but parallelizing
it can be instructive.

FIB (n)
1if n 1
2 return n
3else x = FIB (n - 1)
4 y = FIB (n - 2)
5 return x + y

To analyze this algorithm, let T (n) denote the running time of FIB
(n). Since FIB (n) contains two recursive calls plus a constant amount

of extra work, we obtain the recurrence

T (n) = T (n - 1) + T (n - 2) + (1).

This recurrence has solution T (n) = (Fn), which we can establish by
using the substitution method (see Section 4.3). To show that T (n) =
O(Fn), we'll adopt the inductive hypothesis that T (n) aFn - b, where
a > 1 and b > 0 are constants. Substituting, we obtain

T (n) (aFn-1 - b) + (aFn-2 - b) + (1)
= a(Fn-1 + Fn-2) - 2b + (1)
aFn - b,

if we choose b large enough to dominate the upper-bound constant in
the (1) term. We can then choose a large enough to upper-bound the
(1) base case for small n. To show that T (n) = (Fn), we use the
inductive hypothesis T (n) aFn - b. Substituting and following

reasoning similar to the asymptotic upper-bound argument, we

establish this hypothesis by choosing b smaller than the lower-bound
constant in the (1) term and a small enough to lower-bound the (1)
base case for small n. Theorem 3.1 on page 56 then establishes that T

(n) = (Fn), as desired. Since Fn = (n), where is the

golden ratio, by equation (3.34) on page 69, it follows that

Thus this procedure is a particularly slow way to compute Fibonacci
numbers, since it runs in exponential time. (See Problem 31-3 on page
954 for faster ways.)

Let's see why the algorithm is inefficient. Figure 26.1 shows the tree

of recursive procedure instances created when computing F6 with the

FIB procedure. The call to FIB(6) recursively calls FIB(5) and then
FIB(4). But, the call to FIB(5) also results in a call to FIB(4). Both

instances of FIB(4) return the same result (F4 = 3). Since the FIB

procedure does not memoize (recall the definition of "memoize" from
page 368), the second call to FIB(4) replicates the work that the first
call performs, which is wasteful.

Figure 26.1 The invocation tree for FIB(6). Each node in the tree represents a procedure
instance whose children are the procedure instances it calls during its execution. Since each
instance of FIB with the same argument does the same work to produce the same result, the
inefficiency of this algorithm for computing the Fibonacci numbers can be seen by the vast
number of repeated calls to compute the same thing. The portion of the tree shaded blue
appears in task-parallel form in Figure 26.2.

Although the FIB procedure is a poor way to compute Fibonacci
numbers, it can help us warm up to parallelism concepts. Perhaps the

most basic concept is to understand is that if two parallel tasks operate

on entirely different data, then--absent other interference--they each

produce the same outcomes when executed at the same time as when

they run serially one after the other. Within FIB (n), for example, the
two recursive calls in line 3 to FIB (n - 1) and in line 4 to FIB (n - 2)

can safely execute in parallel because the computation performed by

one in no way affects the other.

Parallel keywords

The P-FIB procedure on the next page computes Fibonacci numbers,

but using the parallel keywords spawn and sync to indicate parallelism in

the pseudocode.
If the keywords spawn and sync are deleted from P-FIB, the

resulting pseudocode text is identical to FIB (other than renaming the
procedure in the header and in the two recursive calls). We define the

serial projection1 of a parallel algorithm to be the serial algorithm that

results from ignoring the parallel directives, which in this case can be
done by omitting the keywords spawn and sync. For parallel for loops,
which we'll see later on, we omit the keyword parallel. Indeed, our
parallel pseudocode possesses the elegant property that its serial
projection is always ordinary serial pseudocode to solve the same
problem.

P-FIB (n)

1 if n 1

2 return n

3 else x = spawn P-FIB (n - 1) // don't wait for subroutine to return

4 y = P-FIB (n - 2) // in parallel with spawned subroutine

5 sync // wait for spawned subroutine to finish

6 return x + y

Semantics of parallel keywords

Spawning occurs when the keyword spawn precedes a procedure call, as

in line 3 of P-FIB. The semantics of a spawn differs from an ordinary
procedure call in that the procedure instance that executes the spawn--

the parent--may continue to execute in parallel with the spawned
subroutine--its child--instead of waiting for the child to finish, as

would happen in a serial execution. In this case, while the spawned child

is computing P-FIB (n - 1), the parent may go on to compute P-FIB
(n-2) in line 4 in parallel with the spawned child. Since the P-FIB

procedure is recursive, these two subroutine calls themselves create
nested parallelism, as do their children, thereby creating a potentially
vast tree of subcomputations, all executing in parallel.

The keyword spawn does not say, however, that a procedure must
execute in parallel with its spawned children, only that it may. The
parallel keywords express the logical parallelism of the computation,

indicating which parts of the computation may proceed in parallel. At

runtime, it is up to a scheduler to determine which subcomputations

actually run in parallel by assigning them to available processors as the
computation unfolds. We'll discuss the theory behind task-parallel
schedulers shortly (on page 759).

A procedure cannot safely use the values returned by its spawned
children until after it executes a sync statement, as in line 5. The
keyword sync indicates that the procedure must wait as necessary for all
its spawned children to finish before proceeding to the statement after
the sync--the "join" of a fork-join parallel computation. The P-FIB
procedure requires a sync before the return statement in line 6 to avoid

the anomaly that would occur if x and y were summed before P-FIB (n
- 1) had finished and its return value had been assigned to x. In

addition to explicit join synchronization provided by the sync statement,
it is convenient to assume that every procedure executes a sync
implicitly before it returns, thus ensuring that all children finish before
their parent finishes.

A graph model for parallel execution

It helps to view the execution of a parallel computation--the dynamic
stream of runtime instructions executed by processors under the

direction of a parallel program--as a directed acyclic graph G = (V, E),
called a (parallel) trace.2 Conceptually, the vertices in V are executed
instructions, and the edges in E represent dependencies between
instructions, where (u, v) E means that the parallel program required
instruction u to execute before instruction v.

It's sometimes inconvenient, especially if we want to focus on the

parallel structure of a computation, for a vertex of a trace to represent

only one executed instruction. Consequently, if a chain of instructions

contains no parallel or procedural control (no spawn, sync, procedure

call, or return--via either an explicit return statement or the return that

happens implicitly upon reaching the end of a procedure), we group the

entire chain into a single strand. As an example, Figure 26.2 shows the

trace that results from computing P-FIB(4) in the portion of Figure

26.1 shaded blue. Strands do not include instructions that involve

parallel or procedural control. These control dependencies must be

represented as edges in the trace.

When a parent procedure calls a child, the trace contains an edge (u,
v) from the strand u in the parent that executes the call to the first
strand v of the spawned child, as illustrated in Figure 26.2 by the edge

from the orange strand in P-FIB(4) to the blue strand in P-FIB(2).

When the last strand v in the child returns, the trace contains an edge
(v, u) to the strand u, where u is the successor strand of u in the

parent, as with the edge from the white strand in P-FIB(2) to the white

strand in P-FIB(4).

Figure 26.2 The trace of P-FIB(4) corresponding to the shaded portion of Figure 26.1. Each
circle represents one strand, with blue circles representing any instructions executed in the

part of the procedure (instance) up to the spawn of P-FIB (n - 1) in line 3; orange circles
representing the instructions executed in the part of the procedure that calls P-FIB (n - 2) in
line 4 up to the sync in line 5, where it suspends until the spawn of P-FIB (n - 1) returns; and

white circles representing the instructions executed in the part of the procedure after the sync,

where it sums x and y, up to the point where it returns the result. Strands belonging to the

same procedure are grouped into a rounded rectangle, blue for spawned procedures and tan for
called procedures. Assuming that each strand takes unit time, the work is 17 time units, since
there are 17 strands, and the span is 8 time units, since the critical path--shown with blue
edges--contains 8 strands.

When the parent spawns a child, however, the trace is a little

different. The edge (u, v) goes from parent to child as with a call, such

as the edge from the blue strand in P-FIB(4) to the blue strand in P-

FIB(3), but the trace contains another edge (u, u) as well, indicating
that u's successor strand u can continue to execute while v is executing.

The edge from the blue strand in P-FIB(4) to the orange strand in P-

FIB(4) illustrates one such edge. As with a call, there is an edge from

the last strand v in the child, but with a spawn, it no longer goes to u's
successor. Instead, the edge is (v, x), where x is the strand immediately

following the sync in the parent that ensures that the child has finished,

as with the edge from the white strand in P-FIB(3) to the white strand

in P-FIB(4).

You can figure out what parallel control created a particular trace. If

a strand has two successors, one of them must have been spawned, and

if a strand has multiple predecessors, the predecessors joined because

of a sync statement. Thus, in the general case, the set V forms the set of
strands, and the set E of directed edges represents dependencies
between strands induced by parallel and procedural control. If G
contains a directed path from strand u to strand v, we say that the two
strands are (logically) in series. If there is no path in G either from u to
v or from v to u, the strands are (logically) in parallel.

A fork-join parallel trace can be pictured as a dag of strands

embedded in an invocation tree of procedure instances. For example,

Figure 26.1 shows the invocation tree for FIB(6), which also serves as

the invocation tree for P-FIB(6), the edges between procedure instances

now representing either calls or spawns. Figure 26.2 zooms in on the

subtree that is shaded blue, showing the strands that constitute each

procedure instance in P-FIB(4). All directed edges connecting strands

run either within a procedure or along undirected edges of the

invocation tree in Figure 26.1. (More general task-parallel traces that

are not fork-join traces may contain some directed edges that do not

run along the undirected tree edges.)

Our analyses generally assume that parallel algorithms execute on an

ideal parallel computer, which consists of a set of processors and a
sequentially consistent shared memory. To understand sequential
consistency, you first need to know that memory is accessed by load
instructions, which copy data from a location in the memory to a
register within a processor, and by store instructions, which copy data

from a processor register to a location in the memory. A single line of

pseudocode can entail several such instructions. For example, the line x
= y + z could result in load instructions to fetch each of y and z from

memory into a processor, an instruction to add them together inside the

processor, and a store instruction to place the result x back into

memory. In a parallel computer, several processors might need to load

or store at the same time. Sequential consistency means that even if

multiple processors attempt to access the memory simultaneously, the

shared memory behaves as if exactly one instruction from one of the

processors is executed at a time, even though the actual transfer of data
may happen at the same time. It is as if the instructions were executed
one at a time sequentially according to some global linear order among
all the processors that preserves the individual orders in which each
processor executes its own instructions.

For task-parallel computations, which are scheduled onto processors
automatically by a runtime system, the sequentially consistent shared
memory behaves as if a parallel computation's executed instructions
were executed one by one in the order of a topological sort (see Section
20.4) of its trace. That is, you can reason about the execution by
imagining that the individual instructions (not generally the strands,
which may aggregate many instructions) are interleaved in some linear
order that preserves the partial order of the trace. Depending on
scheduling, the linear order could vary from one run of the program to
the next, but the behavior of any execution is always as if the
instructions executed serially in a linear order consistent with the
dependencies within the trace.

In addition to making assumptions about semantics, the ideal
parallel-computer model makes some performance assumptions.
Specifically, it assumes that each processor in the machine has equal
computing power, and it ignores the cost of scheduling. Although this
last assumption may sound optimistic, it turns out that for algorithms
with sufficient "parallelism" (a term we'll define precisely a little later),
the overhead of scheduling is generally minimal in practice.

Performance measures

We can gauge the theoretical efficiency of a task-parallel algorithm

using work/span analysis, which is based on two metrics: "work" and
"span." The work of a task-parallel computation is the total time to

execute the entire computation on one processor. In other words, the
work is the sum of the times taken by each of the strands. If each
strand takes unit time, the work is just the number of vertices in the

trace. The span is the fastest possible time to execute the computation

on an unlimited number of processors, which corresponds to the sum of
the times taken by the strands along a longest path in the trace, where

"longest" means that each strand is weighted by its execution time.

Such a longest path is called the critical path of the trace, and thus the

span is the weight of the longest (weighted) path in the trace. (Section

22.2, pages 617619 shows how to find a critical path in a dag G = (V,
E) in (V + E) time.) For a trace in which each strand takes unit time,

the span equals the number of strands on the critical path. For example,
the trace of Figure 26.2 has 17 vertices in all and 8 vertices on its
critical path, so that if each strand takes unit time, its work is 17 time
units and its span is 8 time units.

The actual running time of a task-parallel computation depends not
only on its work and its span, but also on how many processors are
available and how the scheduler allocates strands to processors. To

denote the running time of a task-parallel computation on P processors,
we subscript by P. For example, we might denote the running time of an
algorithm on P processors by TP. The work is the running time on a
single processor, or T1. The span is the running time if we could run

each strand on its own processor--in other words, if we had an

unlimited number of processors--and so we denote the span by T.
The work and span provide lower bounds on the running time TP of

a task-parallel computation on P processors:

In one step, an ideal parallel computer with P processors can do
at most P units of work, and thus in TP time, it can perform at
most P TP work. Since the total work to do is T1, we have P TP
T1. Dividing by P yields the work law:

A P-processor ideal parallel computer cannot run any faster than

a machine with an unlimited number of processors. Looked at
another way, a machine with an unlimited number of processors

can emulate a P-processor machine by using just P of its
processors. Thus, the span law follows:

We define the speedup of a computation on P processors by the ratio
T1/TP, which says how many times faster the computation runs on P
processors than on one processor. By the work law, we have TP T1/P,
which implies that T1/TP P. Thus, the speedup on a P-processor ideal
parallel computer can be at most P. When the speedup is linear in the
number of processors, that is, when T1/TP = (P), the computation
exhibits linear speedup. Perfect linear speedup occurs when T1/TP = P.

The ratio T1/T of the work to the span gives the parallelism of the

parallel computation. We can view the parallelism from three

perspectives. As a ratio, the parallelism denotes the average amount of

work that can be performed in parallel for each step along the critical

path. As an upper bound, the parallelism gives the maximum possible

speedup that can be achieved on any number of processors. Perhaps

most important, the parallelism provides a limit on the possibility of

attaining perfect linear speedup. Specifically, once the number of

processors exceeds the parallelism, the computation cannot possibly

achieve perfect linear speedup. To see this last point, suppose that P >
T1/T, in which case the span law implies that the speedup satisfies
T1/TP T1/T < P. Moreover, if the number P of processors in the
ideal parallel computer greatly exceeds the parallelism--that is, if P
T1/T--then T1/TP P, so that the speedup is much less than the

number of processors. In other words, if the number of processors

exceeds the parallelism, adding even more processors makes the

speedup less perfect.

As an example, consider the computation P-FIB(4) in Figure 26.2,

and assume that each strand takes unit time. Since the work is T1 = 17
and the span is T = 8, the parallelism is T1/T = 17/8 = 2.125.

Consequently, achieving much more than double the performance is

impossible, no matter how many processors execute the computation.

For larger input sizes, however, we'll see that P-FIB (n) exhibits

substantial parallelism.

We define the (parallel) slackness of a task-parallel computation
executed on an ideal parallel computer with P processors to be the ratio

(T1/T)/P = T1/(P T), which is the factor by which the parallelism of

the computation exceeds the number of processors in the machine.
Restating the bounds on speedup, if the slackness is less than 1, perfect

linear speedup is impossible, because T1/(P T) < 1 and the span law
imply that T1/TP T1/T < P. Indeed, as the slackness decreases from

1 and approaches 0, the speedup of the computation diverges further
and further from perfect linear speedup. If the slackness is less than 1,
additional parallelism in an algorithm can have a great impact on its
execution efficiency. If the slackness is greater than 1, however, the
work per processor is the limiting constraint. We'll see that as the
slackness increases from 1, a good scheduler can achieve closer and
closer to perfect linear speedup. But once the slackness is much greater
than 1, the advantage of additional parallelism shows diminishing
returns.

Scheduling

Good performance depends on more than just minimizing the work and
span. The strands must also be scheduled efficiently onto the processors
of the parallel machine. Our fork-join parallel-programming model
provides no way for a programmer to specify which strands to execute
on which processors. Instead, we rely on the runtime system's scheduler
to map the dynamically unfolding computation to individual processors.
In practice, the scheduler maps the strands to static threads, and the
operating system schedules the threads on the processors themselves.
But this extra level of indirection is unnecessary for our understanding
of scheduling. We can just imagine that the scheduler maps strands to
processors directly.

A task-parallel scheduler must schedule the computation without
knowing in advance when procedures will be spawned or when they will

finish--that is, it must operate online. Moreover, a good scheduler

operates in a distributed fashion, where the threads implementing the
scheduler cooperate to load-balance the computation. Provably good
online, distributed schedulers exist, but analyzing them is complicated.

Instead, to keep our analysis simple, we'll consider an online centralized

scheduler that knows the global state of the computation at any
moment.

In particular, we'll analyze greedy schedulers, which assign as many

strands to processors as possible in each time step, never leaving a
processor idle if there is work that can be done. We'll classify each step
of a greedy scheduler as follows:

Complete step: At least P strands are ready to execute, meaning

that all strands on which they depend have finished execution. A

greedy scheduler assigns any P of the ready strands to the

processors, completely utilizing all the processor resources.

Incomplete step: Fewer than P strands are ready to execute. A

greedy scheduler assigns each ready strand to its own processor,
leaving some processors idle for the step, but executing all the
ready strands.

The work law tells us that the fastest running time TP that we can
hope for on P processors must be at least T1/P. The span law tells us
that the fastest possible running time must be at least T. The following

theorem shows that greedy scheduling is provably good in that it
achieves the sum of these two lower bounds as an upper bound.

Theorem 26.1
On an ideal parallel computer with P processors, a greedy scheduler
executes a task-parallel computation with work T1 and span T in time

Proof Without loss of generality, assume that each strand takes unit

time. (If necessary, replace each longer strand by a chain of unit-time
strands.) We'll consider complete and incomplete steps separately.

In each complete step, the P processors together perform a total of
P work. Thus, if the number of complete steps is k, the total work
executing all the complete steps is kP. Since the greedy scheduler
doesn't execute any strand more than once and only T1 work needs to

be performed, it follows that kP T1, from which we can conclude that
the number k of complete steps is at most T1/P.

Now, let's consider an incomplete step. Let G be the trace for the
entire computation, let G be the subtrace of G that has yet to be
executed at the start of the incomplete step, and let G be the subtrace
remaining to be executed after the incomplete step. Consider the set R

of strands that are ready at the beginning of the incomplete step, where

|R| < P. By definition, if a strand is ready, all its predecessors in trace G
have executed. Thus the predecessors of strands in R do not belong to
G. A longest path in G must necessarily start at a strand in R, since
every other strand in G has a predecessor and thus could not start a

longest path. Because the greedy scheduler executes all ready strands

during the incomplete step, the strands of G are exactly those in G
minus the strands in R. Consequently, the length of a longest path in G
must be 1 less than the length of a longest path in G. In other words,

every incomplete step decreases the span of the trace remaining to be

executed by 1. Hence, the number of incomplete steps can be at most

T.

Since each step is either complete or incomplete, the theorem

follows.

The following corollary shows that a greedy scheduler always
performs well.

Corollary 26.2
The running time TP of any task-parallel computation scheduled by a
greedy scheduler on a P-processor ideal parallel computer is within a

factor of 2 of optimal.

Proof Let T*P be the running time produced by an optimal scheduler

on a machine with P processors, and let T1 and T be the work and

span of the computation, respectively. Since the work and span laws--

inequalities (26.2) and (26.3)--give , Theorem 26.1

implies that

The next corollary shows that, in fact, a greedy scheduler achieves
near-perfect linear speedup on any task-parallel computation as the
slackness grows.

Corollary 26.3
Let TP be the running time of a task-parallel computation produced by
a greedy scheduler on an ideal parallel computer with P processors, and
let T1 and Tbe the work and span of the computation, respectively.
Then, if P T1/T, or equivalently, the parallel slackness is much
greater than 1, we have TP T1/P, a speedup of approximately P.

Proof If we suppose that P T1/T, then it follows that T T1/P,
and hence Theorem 26.1 gives TP T1/P + T T1/P. Since the work
law (26.2) dictates that TP T1/P, we conclude that TP T1/P, which is
a speedup of T1/TP P.

The symbol denotes "much less," but how much is "much less"?
As a rule of thumb, a slackness of at least 10--that is, 10 times more
parallelism than processors--generally suffices to achieve good
speedup. Then, the span term in the greedy bound, inequality (26.4), is
less than 10% of the work-per-processor term, which is good enough
for most engineering situations. For example, if a computation runs on
only 10 or 100 processors, it doesn't make sense to value parallelism of,
say 1,000,000, over parallelism of 10,000, even with the factor of 100
difference. As Problem 26-2 shows, sometimes reducing extreme
parallelism yields algorithms that are better with respect to other
concerns and which still scale up well on reasonable numbers of
processors.

Analyzing parallel algorithms

We now have all the tools we need to analyze parallel algorithms using
work/span analysis, allowing us to bound an algorithm's running time
on any number of processors. Analyzing the work is relatively
straightforward, since it amounts to nothing more than analyzing the
running time of an ordinary serial algorithm, namely, the serial
projection of the parallel algorithm. You should already be familiar with
analyzing work, since that is what most of this textbook is about!
Analyzing the span is the new thing that parallelism engenders, but it's
generally no harder once you get the hang of it. Let's investigate the
basic ideas using the P-FIB program.

Analyzing the work T1(n) of P-FIB (n) poses no hurdles, because

we've already done it. The serial projection of P-FIB is effectively the

original FIB procedure, and hence, we have T1(n) = T (n) = (n) from

equation (26.1).
Figure 26.3 illustrates how to analyze the span. If two traces are

joined in series, their spans add to form the span of their composition,
whereas if they are joined in parallel, the span of their composition is
the maximum of the spans of the two traces. As it turns out, the trace
of any fork-join parallel computation can be built up from single
strands by series-parallel composition.

Figure 26.3 Series-parallel composition of parallel traces. (a) When two traces are joined in
series, the work of the composition is the sum of their work, and the span of the composition is
the sum of their spans. (b) When two traces are joined in parallel, the work of the composition
remains the sum of their work, but the span of the composition is only the maximum of their
spans.

Armed with an understanding of series-parallel composition, we can

analyze the span of P-FIB (n). The spawned call to P-FIB (n - 1) in line
3 runs in parallel with the call to P-FIB (n - 2) in line 4. Hence, we can
express the span of P-FIB (n) as the recurrence

T(n) = max {T(n - 1), T(n - 2)} + (1)
= T(n - 1) + (1),

which has solution T(n) = (n). (The second equality above follows
from the first because P-FIB (n - 1) uses P-FIB (n - 2) in its
computation, so that the span of P-FIB (n - 1) must be at least as large
as the span of P-FIB (n - 2).)

The parallelism of P-FIB (n) is T1(n)/T(n) = (n/n), which grows
dramatically as n gets large. Thus, Corollary 26.3 tells us that on even
the largest parallel computers, a modest value for n suffices to achieve
near perfect linear speedup for P-FIB (n), because this procedure

exhibits considerable parallel slackness.

Parallel loops

Many algorithms contain loops for which all the iterations can operate

in parallel. Although the spawn and sync keywords can be used to
parallelize such loops, it is more convenient to specify directly that the
iterations of such loops can run in parallel. Our pseudocode provides

this functionality via the parallel keyword, which precedes the for

keyword in a for loop statement.

As an example, consider the problem of multiplying a square n × n
matrix A = (aij) by an n-vector x = (xj). The resulting n-vector y = (yi)

is given by the equation

for i = 1, 2, ... , n. The P-MAT-VEC procedure performs matrix-vector
multiplication (actually, y = y + Ax) by computing all the entries of y in

parallel. The parallel for keywords in line 1 of P-MAT-VEC indicate

that the n iterations of the loop body, which includes a serial for loop,
may be run in parallel. The initialization y = 0, if desired, should be

performed before calling the procedure (and can be done with a parallel

for loop).

P-MAT-VEC (A, x, y, n)

1 parallel for i = 1 to n // parallel loop
// serial loop
2 for j = 1 to n

3 yi = yi + aij xj

Compilers for fork-join parallel programs can implement parallel for

loops in terms of spawn and sync by using recursive spawning. For

example, for the parallel for loop in lines 13, a compiler can generate
the auxiliary subroutine P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE and call P-MAT-

VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y, n, 1, n) in the place where the loop would

be in the compiled code. As Figure 26.4 illustrates, this procedure
recursively spawns the first half of the iterations of the loop to execute
in parallel (line 5) with the second half of the iterations (line 6) and then

executes a sync (line 7), thereby creating a binary tree of parallel
execution. Each leaf represents a base case, which is the serial for loop
of lines 23.

P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y, n, i, i)

1 if i == i // just one iteration to do?

2 for j = 1 to n // mimic P-MAT-VEC serial loop

3 yi = yi + aij xj

4 else mid = (i + i)/2 // parallel divide-and-conquer

5 spawn P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y, n, i, mid)

6 P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y, n, mid + 1, i)

7 sync

To calculate the work T1(n) of P-MAT-VEC on an n×n matrix,

simply compute the running time of its serial projection, which comes

from replacing the parallel for loop in line 1 with an ordinary for loop.

The running time of the resulting serial pseudocode is (n2), which
means that T1(n) = (n2). This analysis seems to ignore the overhead

for recursive spawning in implementing the parallel loops, however.
Indeed, the overhead of recursive spawning does increase the work of a
parallel loop compared with that of its serial projection, but not
asymptotically. To see why, observe that since the tree of recursive
procedure instances is a full binary tree, the number of internal nodes is
one less than the number of leaves (see Exercise B.5-3 on page 1175).
Each internal node performs constant work to divide the iteration
range, and each leaf corresponds to a base case, which takes at least

constant time ((n) time in this case). Thus, by amortizing the overhead

of recursive spawning over the work of the iterations in the leaves, we
see that the overall work increases by at most a constant factor.

Figure 26.4 A trace for the computation of P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE (A, x, y, 8, 1, 8). The
two numbers within each rounded rectangle give the values of the last two parameters (i and i

in the procedure header) in the invocation (spawn, in blue, or call, in tan) of the procedure. The
blue circles represent strands corresponding to the part of the procedure up to the spawn of PMAT-VEC-RECURSIVE in line 5. The orange circles represent strands corresponding to the
part of the procedure that calls P-MAT-VEC-RECURSIVE in line 6 up to the sync in line 7,
where it suspends until the spawned subroutine in line 5 returns. The white circles represent
strands corresponding to the (negligible) part of the procedure after the sync up to the point
where it returns.

To reduce the overhead of recursive spawning, task-parallel

platforms sometimes coarsen the leaves of the recursion by executing

several iterations in a single leaf, either automatically or under
programmer control. This optimization comes at the expense of
reducing the parallelism. If the computation has sufficient parallel
slackness, however, near-perfect linear speedup won't be sacrificed.

Although recursive spawning doesn't affect the work of a parallel
loop asymptotically, we must take it into account when analyzing the

span. Consider a parallel loop with n iterations in which the ith iteration
has span iter(i). Since the depth of recursion is logarithmic in the

number of iterations, the parallel loop's span is

T(n) = (lg n) + max {iter(i) : 1 i n}.

For example, let's compute the span of the doubly nested loops in
lines 13 of P-MAT-VEC. The span for the parallel for loop control is

(lg n). For each iteration of the outer parallel loop, the inner serial for
loop contains n iterations of line 3. Since each iteration takes constant
time, the total span for the inner serial for loop is (n), no matter which

iteration of the outer parallel for loop it's in. Thus, taking the maximum

over all iterations of the outer loop and adding in the (lg n) for loop
control yields an overall span of Tn = (n) + (lg n) = (n) for the
procedure. Since the work is (n2), the parallelism is (n2)/(n) = (n).

(Exercise 26.1-7 asks you to provide an implementation with even more
parallelism.)

Race conditions

A parallel algorithm is deterministic if it always does the same thing on

the same input, no matter how the instructions are scheduled on the

multicore computer. It is nondeterministic if its behavior might vary

from run to run when the input is the same. A parallel algorithm that is
intended to be deterministic may nevertheless act nondeterministically,
however, if it contains a difficult-to-diagnose bug called a "determinacy
race."

Famous race bugs include the Therac-25 radiation therapy machine,
which killed three people and injured several others, and the Northeast
Blackout of 2003, which left over 50 million people in the United States
without power. These pernicious bugs are notoriously hard to find. You
can run tests in the lab for days without a failure, only to discover that
your software sporadically crashes in the field, sometimes with dire
consequences.

A determinacy race occurs when two logically parallel instructions

access the same memory location and at least one of the instructions
modifies the value stored in the location. The toy procedure RACEEXAMPLE on the following page illustrates a determinacy race. After

initializing x to 0 in line 1, RACE-EXAMPLE creates two parallel
strands, each of which increments x in line 3. Although it might seem

that a call of RACE-EXAMPLE should always print the value 2 (its
serial projection certainly does), it could instead print the value 1. Let's
see how this anomaly might occur.

When a processor increments x, the operation is not indivisible, but

is composed of a sequence of instructions:

Figure 26.5 Illustration of the determinacy race in RACE-EXAMPLE. (a) A trace showing

the dependencies among individual instructions. The processor registers are r1 and r2.

Instructions unrelated to the race, such as the implementation of loop control, are omitted. (b)

An execution sequence that elicits the bug, showing the values of x in memory and registers r1
and r2 for each step in the execution sequence.

RACE-EXAMPLE ( ) // determinacy race

1 x=0
2 parallel for i = 1 to 2
3 x=x+1
4 print x

Load x from memory into one of the processor's registers.

Increment the value in the register.

Store the value in the register back into x in memory.

Figure 26.5(a) illustrates a trace representing the execution of RACEEXAMPLE, with the strands broken down to individual instructions.
Recall that since an ideal parallel computer supports sequential
consistency, you can view the parallel execution of a parallel algorithm
as an interleaving of instructions that respects the dependencies in the

trace. Part (b) of the figure shows the values in an execution of the

computation that elicits the anomaly. The value x is kept in memory,
and r1 and r2 are processor registers. In step 1, one of the processors
sets x to 0. In steps 2 and 3, processor 1 loads x from memory into its
register r1 and increments it, producing the value 1 in r1. At that point,

processor 2 comes into the picture, executing instructions 46.

Processor 2 loads x from memory into register r2; increments it,
producing the value 1 in r2; and then stores this value into x, setting x
to 1. Now, processor 1 resumes with step 7, storing the value 1 in r1 into
x, which leaves the value of x unchanged. Therefore, step 8 prints the

value 1, rather than the value 2 that the serial projection would print.
Let's recap what happened. By sequential consistency, the effect of

the parallel execution is as if the executed instructions of the two
processors are interleaved. If processor 1 executes all its instructions
before processor 2, a trivial interleaving, the value 2 is printed.
Conversely, if processor 2 executes all its instructions before processor
1, the value 2 is still printed. When the instructions of the two
processors interleave nontrivially, however, it is possible, as in this

example execution, that one of the updates to x is lost, resulting in the

value 1 being printed.
Of course, many executions do not elicit the bug. That's the problem

with determinacy races. Generally, most instruction orderings produce
correct results, such as any where the instructions on the left branch
execute before the instructions on the right branch, or vice versa. But
some orderings generate improper results when the instructions
interleave. Consequently, races can be extremely hard to test for. Your
program may fail, but you may be unable to reliably reproduce the
failure in subsequent tests, confounding your attempts to locate the bug
in your code and fix it. Task-parallel programming environments often
provide race-detection productivity tools to help you isolate race bugs.

Many parallel programs in the real world are intentionally
nondeterministic. They contain determinacy races, but they mitigate the
dangers of nondeterminism through the use of mutual-exclusion locks
and other methods of synchronization. For our purposes, however, we'll

insist on an absence of determinacy races in the algorithms we develop.
Nondeterministic programs are indeed interesting, but nondeterministic
programming is a more advanced topic and unnecessary for a wide
swath of interesting parallel algorithms.

To ensure that algorithms are deterministic, any two strands that

operate in parallel should be mutually noninterfering: they only read,

and do not modify, any memory locations accessed by both of them.

Consequently, in a parallel for construct, such as the outer loop of PMAT-VEC, we want all the iterations of the body, including any code
an iteration executes in subroutines, to be mutually noninterfering. And

between a spawn and its corresponding sync, we want the code executed
by the spawned child and the code executed by the parent to be
mutually noninterfering, once again including invoked subroutines.

As an example of how easy it is to write code with unintentional
races, the P-MAT-VEC-WRONG procedure on the next page is a
faulty parallel implementation of matrix-vector multiplication that

achieves a span of (lg n) by parallelizing the inner for loop. This

procedure is incorrect, unfortunately, due to determinacy races when

updating yi in line 3, which executes in parallel for all n values of j.
Index variables of parallel for loops, such as i in line 1 and j in line 2,

do not cause races between iterations. Conceptually, each iteration of
the loop creates an independent variable to hold the index of that
iteration during that iteration's execution of the loop body. Even if two
parallel iterations both access the same index variable, they really are
accessing different variable instances--hence different memory
locations--and no race occurs.

P-MAT-VEC-WRONG (A, x, y, n)

1 parallel for i = 1 to n

2 parallel for j = 1 to n

3 yi = yi + aijxj // determinacy race

A parallel algorithm with races can sometimes be deterministic. As
an example, two parallel threads might store the same value into a

shared variable, and it wouldn't matter which stored the value first. For
simplicity, however, we generally prefer code without determinacy races,
even if the races are benign. And good parallel programmers frown on
code with determinacy races that cause nondeterministic behavior, if
deterministic code that performs comparably is an option.

But nondeterministic code does have its place. For example, you
can't implement a parallel hash table, a highly practical data structure,
without writing code containing determinacy races. Much research has
centered around how to extend the fork-join model to incorporate
limited "structured" nondeterminism while avoiding the full measure of
complications that arise when nondeterminism is completely
unrestricted.

A chess lesson

To illustrate the power of work/span analysis, this section closes with a

true story that occurred during the development of one of the first

world-class parallel chess-playing programs [106] many years ago. The

timings below have been simplified for exposition.

The chess program was developed and tested on a 32-processor

computer, but it was designed to run on a supercomputer with 512

processors. Since the supercomputer availability was limited and

expensive, the developers ran benchmarks on the small computer and

extrapolated performance to the large computer.

At one point, the developers incorporated an optimization into the

program that reduced its running time on an important benchmark on

the small machine from T32 = 65 seconds to seconds. Yet, the

developers used the work and span performance measures to conclude

that the optimized version, which was faster on 32 processors, would

actually be slower than the original version on the 512 processors of the

large machine. As a result, they abandoned the "optimization."

Here is their work/span analysis. The original version of the program

had work T1 = 2048 seconds and span T= 1 second. Let's treat

inequality (26.4) on page 760 as the equation TP = T1/P + T, which

we can use as an approximation to the running time on P processors.

Then indeed we have T32 = 2048/32 + 1 = 65. With the optimization,

the work becomes T1 = 1024 seconds, and the span becomes T = 8

seconds. Our approximation gives T32 = 1024/32 + 8 = 40.

The relative speeds of the two versions switch when we estimate their

running times on 512 processors, however. The first version has a

running time of T512 = 2048/512+1 = 5 seconds, and the second

version runs in seconds. The optimization that

speeds up the program on 32 processors makes the program run for

twice as long on 512 processors! The optimized version's span of 8,

which is not the dominant term in the running time on 32 processors,

becomes the dominant term on 512 processors, nullifying the advantage

from using more processors. The optimization does not scale up.

The moral of the story is that work/span analysis, and measurements

of work and span, can be superior to measured running times alone in

extrapolating an algorithm's scalability.

Exercises

26.1-1

What does a trace for the execution of a serial algorithm look like?

26.1-2
Suppose that line 4 of P-FIB spawns P-FIB (n - 2), rather than calling

it as is done in the pseudocode. How would the trace of P-FIB(4) in
Figure 26.2 change? What is the impact on the asymptotic work, span,
and parallelism?

26.1-3

Draw the trace that results from executing P-FIB(5). Assuming that
each strand in the computation takes unit time, what are the work,
span, and parallelism of the computation? Show how to schedule the
trace on 3 processors using greedy scheduling by labeling each strand
with the time step in which it is executed.

26.1-4

Prove that a greedy scheduler achieves the following time bound, which
is slightly stronger than the bound proved in Theorem 26.1:

26.1-5

Construct a trace for which one execution by a greedy scheduler can
take nearly twice the time of another execution by a greedy scheduler
on the same number of processors. Describe how the two executions
would proceed.

26.1-6

Professor Karan measures her deterministic task-parallel algorithm on
4, 10, and 64 processors of an ideal parallel computer using a greedy

scheduler. She claims that the three runs yielded T4 = 80 seconds, T10 =
42 seconds, and T64 = 10 seconds. Argue that the professor is either
lying or incompetent. (Hint: Use the work law (26.2), the span law

(26.3), and inequality (26.5) from Exercise 26.1-4.)

26.1-7
Give a parallel algorithm to multiply an n × n matrix by an n-vector that
achieves (n2/lg n) parallelism while maintaining (n2) work.

26.1-8

Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of the procedure P-

TRANSPOSE, which transposes an n × n matrix A in place.

P-TRANSPOSE (A, n)

1 parallel for j = 2 to n

2 parallel for i = 1 to j - 1

3 exchange aij with aji

26.1-9

Suppose that instead of a parallel for loop in line 2, the P-TRANSPOSE
procedure in Exercise 26.1-8 had an ordinary for loop. Analyze the

work, span, and parallelism of the resulting algorithm.

26.1-10

For what number of processors do the two versions of the chess

program run equally fast, assuming that TP = T1/P + T?