27.1 Waiting for an elevator

Our first example of an online algorithm models a problem that you
likely have encountered yourself: whether you should wait for an
elevator to arrive or just take the stairs. Suppose that you enter a

building and wish to visit an office that is k floors up. You have two

choices: walk up the stairs or take the elevator. Let's assume, for
convenience, that you can climb the stairs at the rate of one floor per
minute. The elevator travels much faster than you can climb the stairs:

it can ascend all k floors in just one minute. Your dilemma is that you do

not know how long it will take for the elevator to arrive at the ground
floor and pick you up. Should you take the elevator or the stairs? How
do you decide?

Let's analyze the problem. Taking the stairs takes k minutes, no
matter what. Suppose you know that the elevator takes at most B - 1
minutes to arrive for some value of B that is considerably higher than k.

(The elevator could be going up when you call for it and then stop at
several floors on its way down.) To keep things simple, let's also assume
that the number of minutes for the elevator to arrive is an integer.

Therefore, waiting for the elevator and taking it k floors up takes

anywhere from one minute (if the elevator is already at the ground

floor) to (B - 1) + 1 = B minutes (the worst case). Although you know B
and k, you don't know how long the elevator will take to arrive this time.

You can use competitive analysis to inform your decision regarding
whether to take the stairs or elevator. In the spirit of competitive
analysis, you want to be sure that, no matter what the future brings (i.e.,
how long the elevator takes to arrive), you will not wait much longer
than a seer who knows when the elevator will arrive.

Let us first consider what the seer would do. If the seer knows that

the elevator is going to arrive in at most k - 1 minutes, the seer waits
for the elevator, and otherwise, the seer takes the stairs. Letting m

denote the number of minutes it takes for the elevator to arrive at the
ground floor, we can express the time that the seer spends as the
function

We typically evaluate online algorithms by their competitive ratio.

Let U denote the set (universe) of all possible inputs, and consider some

input I U. For a minimization problem, such as the stairs-versus-

elevator problem, if an online algorithm A produces a solution with
value A(I) on input I and the solution from an algorithm F that knows
the future has value F(I) on the same input, then the competitive ratio
of algorithm A is
max {A(I)/F(I) : I U}.
If an online algorithm has a competitive ratio of c, we say that it is ccompetitive. The competitive ratio is always at least 1, so that we want

an online algorithm with a competitive ratio as close to 1 as possible.
In the stairs-versus-elevator problem, the only input is the time for

the elevator to arrive. Algorithm F knows this information, but an

online algorithm has to make a decision without knowing when the
elevator will arrive. Consider the algorithm "always take the stairs,"

which always takes exactly k minutes. Using equation (27.1), the

competitive ratio is

Enumerating the terms in equation (27.2) gives the competitive ratio as

so that the competitive ratio is k. The maximum is achieved when the
elevator arrives immediately. In this case, taking the stairs requires k

minutes, but the optimal solution takes just 1 minute.
Now let's consider the opposite approach: "always take the

elevator." If it takes m minutes for the elevator to arrive at the ground
floor, then this algorithm will always take m + 1 minutes. Thus the

competitive ratio becomes

max {(m + 1)/t(m) : 0 m B - 1},

which we can again enumerate as

Now the maximum is achieved when the elevator takes B - 1 minutes to

arrive, compared with the optimal approach of taking the stairs, which

requires k minutes.

Hence, the algorithm "always take the stairs" has competitive ratio

k, and the algorithm "always take the elevator" has competitive ratio
B/k. Because we prefer the algorithm with smaller competitive ratio, if k
= 10 and B = 300, we prefer "always take the stairs," with competitive

ratio 10, over "always take the elevator," with competitive ratio 30.
Taking the stairs is not always better, or necessarily more often better.
It's just that taking the stairs guards better against the worst-case
future.

These two approaches of always taking the stairs and always taking
the elevator are extreme solutions, however. Instead, you can "hedge
your bets" and guard even better against a worst-case future. In
particular, you can wait for the elevator for a while, and then if it
doesn't arrive, take the stairs. How long is "a while"? Let's say that "a

while" is k minutes. Then the time h(m) required by this hedging
strategy, as a function of the number m of minutes before the elevator

arrives, is

In the second case, h(m) = 2k because you wait for k minutes and then
climb the stairs for k minutes. The competitive ratio is now
max {h(m)/t(m) : 0 m B - 1}.

Enumerating this ratio yields

The competitive ratio is now independent of k and B.

This example illustrates a common philosophy in online algorithms:
we want an algorithm that guards against any possible worst case.
Initially, waiting for the elevator guards against the case when the
elevator arrives quickly, but eventually switching to the stairs guards
against the case when the elevator takes a long time to arrive.

Exercises

27.1-1

Suppose that when hedging your bets, you wait for p minutes, instead of
for k minutes, before taking the stairs. What is the competitive ratio as a
function of p and k? How should you choose p to minimize the

competitive ratio?

27.1-2

Imagine that you decide to take up downhill skiing. Suppose that a pair

of skis costs r dollars to rent for a day and b dollars to buy, where b > r.

If you knew in advance how many days you would ever ski, your
decision whether to rent or buy would be easy. If you'll ski for at least

b/r days, then you should buy skis, and otherwise you should rent.

This strategy minimizes the total that you ever spend. In reality, you
don't know in advance how many days you'll eventually ski. Even after
you have skied several times, you still don't know how many more times
you'll ever ski. Yet you don't want to waste your money. Give and
analyze an algorithm that has a competitive ratio of 2, that is, an
algorithm guaranteeing that, no matter how many times you ski, you
never spend more than twice what you would have spent if you knew
from the outset how many times you'll ski.

27.1-3
In "concentration solitaire," a game for one person, you have n pairs of

matching cards. The backs of the cards are all the same, but the fronts
contain pictures of animals. One pair has pictures of aardvarks, one
pair has pictures of bears, one pair has pictures of camels, and so on. At
the start of the game, the cards are all placed face down. In each round,
you can turn two cards face up to reveal their pictures. If the pictures
match, then you remove that pair from the game. If they don't match,
then you turn both of them over, hiding their pictures once again. The

game ends when you have removed all n pairs, and your score is how

many rounds you needed to do so. Suppose that you can remember the
picture on every card that you have seen. Give an algorithm to play
concentration solitaire that has a competitive ratio of 2.