27.2 Maintaining a search list

The next example of an online algorithm pertains to maintaining the
order of elements in a linked list, as in Section 10.2. This problem often
arises in practice for hash tables when collisions are resolved by
chaining (see Section 11.2), since each slot contains a linked list.
Reordering the linked list of elements in each slot of the hash table can
boost the performance of searches measurably.

The list-maintenance problem can be set up as follows. You are given

a list L of n elements {x1, x2, ... , xn}. We'll assume that the list is

doubly linked, although the algorithms and analysis work just as well

for singly linked lists. Denote the position of element xi in the list L by
rL(xi), where 1 rL(xi) n. Calling LIST-SEARCH(L, xi) on page 260
thus takes (rL(xi)) time.

If you know in advance something about the distribution of search
requests, then it makes sense to arrange the list ahead of time to put the
more frequently searched elements closer to the front, which minimizes
the total cost (see Exercise 27.2-1). If instead you don't know anything
about the search sequence, then no matter how you arrange the list, it is
possible that every search is for whatever element appears at the tail of

the list. The total searching time would then be (nm), where m is the

number of searches.
If you notice patterns in the access sequence or you observe

differences in the frequencies in which elements are accessed, then you
might want to rearrange the list as you perform searches. For example,
if you discover that every search is for a particular element, you could
move that element to the front of the list. In general, you could
rearrange the list after each call to LIST-SEARCH. But how would you
do so without knowing the future? After all, no matter how you move
elements around, every search could be for the last element.

But it turns out that some search sequences are "easier" than others.
Rather than just evaluate performance on the worst-case sequence, let's
compare a reorganization scheme with whatever an optimal offline
algorithm would do if it knew the search sequence in advance. That way,
if the sequence is fundamentally hard, the optimal offline algorithm will
also find it hard, but if the sequence is easy, we can hope to do
reasonably well.

To ease analysis, we'll drop the asymptotic notation and say that the

cost is just i to search for the ith element in the list. Let's also assume

that the only way to reorder the elements in the list is by swapping two
adjacent elements in the list. Because the list is doubly linked, each swap
incurs a cost of 1. Thus, for example, a search for the sixth element
followed by moving it forward two places (entailing two swaps) incurs a
total cost 8. The goal is to minimize the total cost of calls to LISTSEARCH plus the total number of swaps performed.

The online algorithm that we'll explore is MOVE-TO-FRONT(L, x).
This procedure first searches for x in the doubly linked list L, and then
it moves x to the front of the list.1 If x is located at position r = rL(x)
before the call, MOVE-TO-FRONT swaps x with the element in
position r - 1, then with the element in position r - 2, and so on, until it
finally swaps x with the element in position 1. Thus if the call MOVETO-FRONT(L, 8) executes on the list L = 5, 3, 12, 4, 8, 9, 22, the list
becomes 8, 5, 3, 12, 4, 9, 22. The call MOVE-TO-FRONT(L, k) costs
2rL(k) - 1: it costs rL(k) to search for k, and it costs 1 for each of the
rL(k) - 1 swaps that move k to the front of the list.

Figure 27.1 The costs incurred by the procedures FORESEE and MOVE-TO-FRONT when

searching for the elements 5, 3, 4, and 4, starting with the list L = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. If FORESEE

instead moved 3 to the front after the search for 5, the cumulative cost would not change, nor
would the cumulative cost change if 4 moved to the second position after the search for 5.

We'll see that MOVE-TO-FRONT has a competitive ratio of 4. Let's
think about what this means. MOVE-TO-FRONT performs a series of
operations on a doubly linked list, accumulating cost. For comparison,
suppose that there is an algorithm FORESEE that knows the future.
Like MOVE-TO-FRONT, it also searches the list and moves elements
around, but after each call it optimally rearranges the list for the future.

(There may be more than one optimal order.) Thus FORESEE and
MOVE-TO-FRONT maintain different lists of the same elements.

Consider the example shown in Figure 27.1. Starting with the list 1,

2, 3, 4, 5, four searches occur, for the elements 5, 3, 4, and 4. The
hypothetical procedure FORESEE, after searching for 3, moves 4 to the
front of the list, knowing that a search for 4 is imminent. It thus incurs
a swap cost of 3 upon its second call, after which no further swap costs
accrue. MOVE-TO-FRONT incurs swap costs in each step, moving the
found element to the front. In this example, MOVE-TO-FRONT has a
higher cost in each step, but that is not necessarily always the case.

The key to proving the competitive bound is to show that at any
point, the total cost of MOVE-TO-FRONT is not much higher than
that of FORESEE. Surprisingly, we can determine a bound on the costs
incurred by MOVE-TO-FRONT relative to FORESEE even though
MOVE-TO-FRONT cannot see the future.

If we compare any particular step, MOVE-TO-FRONT and
FORESEE may be operating on very different lists and do very
different things. If we focus on the search for 4 above, we observe that
FORESEE actually moves it to the front of the list early, paying to
move the element to the front before it is accessed. To capture this

concept, we use the idea of an inversion: a pair of elements, say a and b,
in which a appears before b in one list, but b appears before a in
another list. For two lists L and L, let I(L, L), called the inversion
count, denote the number of inversions between the two lists, that is, the

number of pairs of elements whose order differs in the two lists. For

example, with lists L = 5,3,1,4,2 and L = 3,1,2,4,5, then out of the

pairs, exactly five of them--(1, 5), (2, 4), (2, 5), (3, 5), (4, 5)--are
inversions, since these pairs, and only these pairs, appear in different

orders in the two lists. Thus the inversion count is I(L, L) = 5.

In order to analyze the algorithm, we define the following notation.
Let be the list maintained by MOVE-TO-FRONT immediately after

the ith search, and similarly, let be FORESEE's list immediately after
the ith search. Let and be the costs incurred by MOVE-TOFRONT and FORESEE on their ith calls, respectively. We don't know
how many swaps FORESEE performs in its ith call, but we'll denote

that number by ti. Therefore, if the ith operation is a search for element
x, then

In order to compare these costs more carefully, let's break down the
elements into subsets, depending on their positions in the two lists

before the ith search, relative to the element x being searched for in the
ith search. We define three sets:

BB = {elements before x in both and },

BA = {elements before x in but after x in },

AB = {elements after x in but before x in }.

We can now relate the position of element x in and to the sizes

of these sets:

When a swap occurs in one of the lists, it changes the relative

positions of the two elements involved, which in turn changes the

inversion count. Suppose that elements x and y are swapped in some

list. Then the only possible difference in the inversion count between

this list and any other list depends on whether (x, y) is an inversion. In

fact, the inversion count of (x, y) with respect to any other list must

change. If (x, y) is an inversion before the swap, it no longer is

afterward, and vice versa. Therefore, if two consecutive elements x and

y swap positions in a list L, then for any other list L, the value of the

inversion count I(L, L) either increases by 1 or decreases by 1.

As we compare MOVE-TO-FRONT and FORESEE searching and

modifying their lists, we'll think about MOVE-TO-FRONT executing

on its list for the ith time and then FORESEE executing on its list for

the ith time. After MOVE-TO-FRONT has executed for the ith time

and before FORESEE has executed for the ith time, we'll compare

(the inversion count immediately before the ith call of MOVE-

TO-FRONT) with (the inversion count after the ith call of

MOVE-TO-FRONT but before the ith call of FORESEE). We'll

concern ourselves later with what FORESEE does.

Let us analyze what happens to the inversion count after executing

the ith call of MOVE-TO-FRONT, and suppose that it searches for

element x. More precisely, we'll compute , the

change in the inversion count, which gives a rough idea of how much

MOVE-TO-FRONT's list becomes more or less like FORESEE's list.

After searching, MOVE-TO-FRONT performs a series of swaps with

each of the elements on the list that precedes x. Using the notation

above, the number of such swaps is |BB| + |BA|. Bearing in mind that the

list has yet to be changed by the ith call of FORESEE, let's see how

the inversion count changes.

Consider a swap with an element y BB. Before the swap, y precedes

x in both and . After the swap, x precedes y in , and does

not change. Therefore, the inversion count increases by 1 for each

element in BB. Now consider a swap with an element z BA. Before the

swap, z precedes x in but x precedes z in . After the swap, x

precedes z in both lists. Therefore, the inversion count decreases by 1

for each element in BA. Thus altogether, the inversion count increases

by

We have laid the groundwork needed to analyze MOVE-TOFRONT.

Theorem 27.1

Algorithm MOVE-TO-FRONT has a competitive ratio of 4.

Proof The proof uses a potential function, as described in Chapter 16
on amortized analysis. The value i of the potential function after the
ith calls of MOVE-TO-FRONT and FORESEE depends on the

inversion count:

(Intuitively, the factor of 2 embodies the notion that each inversion
represents a cost of 2 for MOVE-TO-FRONT relative to FORESEE: 1

for searching and 1 for swapping.) By equation (27.7), after the ith call
of MOVE-TO-FRONT, but before the ith call of FORESEE, the
potential increases by 2(|BB| - |BA|). Since the inversion count of the
two lists is nonnegative, we have i 0 for all i 0. Assuming that

MOVE-TO-FRONT and FORESEE start with the same list, the initial

potential 0 is 0, so that i 0 for all i.

Drawing from equation (16.2) on page 456, the amortized cost of

the ith MOVE-TO-FRONT operation is

where , the actual cost of the ith MOVE-TO-FRONT operation, is

given by equation (27.3):

Now, let's consider the potential change i - i-1. Since both LM and
LF change, let's consider the changes to one list at a time. Recall that
when MOVE-TO-FRONT moves element x to the front, it increases the
potential by exactly 2(|BB| - |BA|). We now consider how the optimal
algorithm FORESEE changes its list LF: it performs ti swaps. Each

swap performed by FORESEE either increases or decreases the
potential by 2, and thus the increase in potential by FORESEE in the

ith call can be at most 2ti. We therefore have

We now finish the proof as in Chapter 16 by showing that the total
amortized cost provides an upper bound on the total actual cost,
because the initial potential function is 0 and the potential function is

always nonnegative. By equation (16.3) on page 456, for any sequence

of m MOVE-TO-FRONT operations, we have

Therefore, we have

Thus the total cost of the m MOVE-TO-FRONT operations is at most 4
times the total cost of the m FORESEE operations, so MOVE-TO-

FRONT is 4-competitive.

Isn't it amazing that we can compare MOVE-TO-FRONT with the
optimal algorithm FORESEE when we have no idea of the swaps that
FORESEE makes? We were able to relate the performance of MOVETO-FRONT to the optimal algorithm by capturing how particular
properties (swaps in this case) must evolve relative to the optimal
algorithm, without actually knowing the optimal algorithm.

The online algorithm MOVE-TO-FRONT has a competitive ratio of
4: on any input sequence, it incurs a cost at most 4 times that of any
other algorithm. On a particular input sequence, it could cost much less
than 4 times the optimal algorithm, perhaps even matching the optimal
algorithm.

Exercises

27.2-1
You are given a set S = {x1, x2, ... , xn} of n elements, and you wish to
make a static list L (no rearranging once the list is created) containing

the elements of S that is good for searching. Suppose that you have a
probability distribution, where p(xi) is the probability that a given
search searches for element xi. Argue that the expected cost for m

searches is

Prove that this sum is minimized when the elements of L are sorted in
decreasing order with respect to p(xi).

27.2-2

Professor Carnac claims that since FORESEE is an optimal algorithm
that knows the future, then at each step it must incur no more cost than
MOVE-TO-FRONT. Either prove that Professor Carnac is correct or
provide a counterexample.

27.2-3

Another way to maintain a linked list for efficient searching is for each

element to maintain a frequency count: the number of times that the

element has been searched for. The idea is to rearrange list elements
after searches so that the list is always sorted by decreasing frequency

count, from largest to smallest. Either show that this algorithm is O(1)-

competitive, or prove that it is not.

27.2-4

The model in this section charged a cost of 1 for each swap. We can

consider an alternative cost model in which, after accessing x, you can
move x anywhere earlier in the list, and there is no cost for doing so.

The only cost is the cost of the actual accesses. Show that MOVE-TOFRONT is 2-competitive in this cost model, assuming that the number

requests is sufficiently large. (Hint: Use the potential function

.)