27.3 Online caching

In Section 15.4, we studied the caching problem, in which blocks of data
from the main memory of a computer are stored in the cache: a small

but faster memory. In that section, we studied the offline version of the
problem, in which we assumed that we knew the sequence of memory
requests in advance, and we designed an algorithm to minimize the
number of cache misses. In almost all computer systems, caching is, in
fact, an online problem. We do not generally know the series of cache
requests in advance; they are presented to the algorithm only as the
requests for blocks are actually made. To gain a better understanding of
this more realistic scenario, we analyze online algorithms for caching.
We will first see that all deterministic online algorithms for caching have

a lower bound of (k) for the competitive ratio, where k is the size of

the cache. We will then present an algorithm with a competitive ratio of

(n), where the input size is n, and one with a competitive ratio of O(k),

which matches the lower bound. We will end by showing how to use
randomization to design an algorithm with a much better competitive

ratio of (lg k). We will also discuss the assumptions that underlie

randomized online algorithms, via the notion of an adversary, such as
we saw in Chapter 11 and will see in Chapter 31.

You can find the terminology used to describe the caching problem
in Section 15.4, which you might wish to review before proceeding.

27.3.1 Deterministic caching algorithms

In the caching problem, the input comprises a sequence of n memory
requests, for data in blocks b1, b2, ... , bn, in that order. The blocks

requested are not necessarily distinct: each block may appear multiple

times within the request sequence. After block bi is requested, it resides
in a cache that can hold up to k blocks, where k is a fixed cache size. We
assume that n > k, since otherwise we are assured that the cache can
hold all the requested blocks at once. When a block bi is requested, if it
is already in the cache, then a cache hit occurs and the cache remains
unchanged. If bi is not in the cache, then a cache miss occurs. If the
cache contains fewer than k blocks upon a cache miss, block bi is placed

into the cache, which now contains one block more than before. If a

cache miss occurs with an already full cache, however, some block must

be evicted from the cache before bi can enter. Thus, a caching algorithm

must decide which block to evict from the cache upon a cache miss
when the cache is full. The goal is to minimize the number of cache
misses over the entire request sequence. The caching algorithms
considered in this chapter differ only in which block they decide to evict
upon a cache miss. We do not consider abilities such as prefetching, in
which a block is brought into the cache before an upcoming request in
order to avert a future cache miss.

There are many online caching policies to determine which block to
evict, including the following:

First-in, first-out (FIFO): evict the block that has been in the
cache the longest time.

Last-in, first-out (LIFO): evict the block that has been in the
cache the shortest time.

Least Recently Used (LRU): evict the block whose last use is
furthest in the past.

Least Frequently Used (LFU): evict the block that has been
accessed the fewest times, breaking ties by choosing the block
that has been in the cache the longest.

To analyze these algorithms, we assume that the cache starts out

empty, so that no evictions occur during the first k requests. We wish to

compare the performance of an online algorithm to an optimal offline
algorithm that knows the future requests. As we will soon see, all these

deterministic online algorithms have a lower bound of (k) for their

competitive ratio. Some deterministic algorithms also have a

competitive ratio with an O(k) upper bound, but some other

deterministic algorithms are considerably worse, having a competitive

ratio of (n/k).

We now proceed to analyze the LIFO and LRU policies. In addition

to assuming that n > k, we will assume that at least k distinct blocks are

requested. Otherwise, the cache never fills up and no blocks are evicted,

so that all algorithms exhibit the same behavior. We begin by showing

that LIFO has a large competitive ratio.

Theorem 27.2
LIFO has a competitive ratio of (n/k) for the online caching problem
with n requests and a cache of size k.

Proof We first show a lower bound of (n/k). Suppose that the input
consists of k + 1 blocks, numbered 1, 2, ... , k + 1, and the request

sequence is

1, 2, 3, 4, ... , k, k + 1, k, k + 1, k, k + 1, ... ,

where after the initial 1, 2, ... , k, k + 1, the remainder of the sequence
alternates between k and k + 1, with a total of n requests. The sequence
ends on block k if n and k are either both even or both odd, and
otherwise, the sequence ends on block k+1. That is, bi = i for i = 1, 2, ...
k-1, bi = k+1 for i = k+1, k+3, ... and bi = k for i = k, k + 2, .... How
many blocks does LIFO evict? After the first k requests (which are

considered to be cache misses), the cache is filled with blocks 1, 2, ... ,

k. The (k + 1)st request, which is for block k + 1, causes block k to be
evicted. The (k + 2)nd request, which is for block k, forces block k + 1

to be evicted, since that block was just placed into the cache. This

behavior continues, alternately evicting blocks k and k+1 for the

remaining requests. LIFO, therefore, suffers a cache miss on every one

of the n requests.

The optimal offline algorithm knows the entire sequence of requests

in advance. Upon the first request of block k + 1, it just evicts any block
except block k, and then it never evicts another block. Thus, the
optimal offline algorithm evicts only once. Since the first k requests are
considered cache misses, the total number of cache misses is k + 1. The
competitive ratio, therefore, is n/(k + 1), or (n/k).

For the upper bound, observe that on any input of size n, any
caching algorithm incurs at most n cache misses. Because the input
contains at least k distinct blocks, any caching algorithm, including the
optimal offline algorithm, must incur at least k cache misses. Therefore,
LIFO has a competitive ratio of O(n/k).

We call such a competitive ratio unbounded, because it grows with

the input size. Exercise 27.3-2 asks you to show that LFU also has an
unbounded competitive ratio.

FIFO and LRU have a much better competitive ratio of (k). There
is a big difference between competitive ratios of (n/k) and (k). The
cache size k is independent of the input sequence and does not grow as
more requests arrive over time. A competitive ratio that depends on n,

on the other hand, does grow with the size of the input sequence and
thus can get quite large. It is preferable to use an algorithm with a
competitive ratio that does not grow with the input sequence's size,
when possible.

We now show that LRU has a competitive ratio of (k), first showing

the upper bound.

Theorem 27.3
LRU has a competitive ratio of O(k) for the online caching problem
with n requests and a cache of size k.

Proof To analyze LRU, we will divide the sequence of requests into
epochs. Epoch 1 begins with the first request. Epoch i, for i > 1, begins
upon encountering the (k + 1)st distinct request since the beginning of
epoch i - 1. Consider the following example of requests with k = 3:

The first k = 3 distinct requests are for blocks 1, 2 and 5, so epoch 2

begins with the first request for block 4. In epoch 2, the first 3 distinct
requests are for blocks 4, 1, and 2. Requests for these blocks recur until
the request for block 3, and with this request epoch 3 begins. Thus, this
example has four epochs:

Now we consider the behavior of LRU. In each epoch, the first time
a request for a particular block appears, it may cause a cache miss, but
subsequent requests for that block within the epoch cannot cause a

cache miss, since the block is now one of the k most recently used. For

example, in epoch 2, the first request for block 4 causes a cache miss,

but the subsequent requests for block 4 do not. (Exercise 27.3-1 asks

you to show the contents of the cache after each request.) In epoch 3,

requests for blocks 3 and 5 cause cache misses, but the request for

block 4 does not, because it was recently accessed in epoch 2. Since

only the first request for a block within an epoch can cause a cache miss

and the cache holds k blocks, each epoch incurs at most k cache misses.

Now consider the behavior of the optimal algorithm. The first

request in each epoch must cause a cache miss, even for an optimal

algorithm. The miss occurs because, by the definition of an epoch, there

must have been k other blocks accessed since the last access to this

block.

Since, for each epoch, the optimal algorithm incurs at least one miss

and LRU incurs at most k, the competitive ratio is at most k/1 = O(k).

Exercise 27.3-3 asks you to show that FIFO also has a competitive

ratio of O(k).
We could show lower bounds of (k) on LRU and FIFO, but in fact,

we can make a much stronger statement: any deterministic online
caching algorithm must have a competitive ratio of (k). The proof

relies on an adversary who knows the online algorithm being used and

can tailor the future requests to cause the online algorithm to incur

more cache misses than the optimal offline algorithm.

Consider a scenario in which the cache has size k and the set of
possible blocks to request is {1, 2, ... , k + 1}. The first k requests are
for blocks 1, 2, ... , k, so that both the adversary and the deterministic

online algorithm place these blocks into the cache. The next request is

for block k + 1. In order to make room in the cache for block k + 1, the
online algorithm evicts some block b1 from the cache. The adversary,
knowing that the online algorithm has just evicted block b1, makes the
next request be for b1, so that the online algorithm must evict some
other block b2 to clear room in the cache for b1. As you might have
guessed, the adversary makes the next request be for block b2, so that
the online algorithm evicts some other block b3 to make room for b2.

The online algorithm and the adversary continue in this manner. The
online algorithm incurs a cache miss on every request and therefore

incurs n cache misses over the n requests.

Now let's consider an optimal offline algorithm, which knows the
future. As discussed in Section 15.4, this algorithm is known as
furthest-in-future, and it always evicts the block whose next request is

furthest in the future. Since there are only k + 1 unique blocks, when

furthest-in-future evicts a block, we know that it will not be accessed

during at least the next k requests. Thus, after the first k cache misses,
the optimal algorithm incurs a cache miss at most once every k
requests. Therefore, the number of cache misses over n requests is at
most k + n/k.

Since the deterministic online algorithm incurs n cache misses and
the optimal offline algorithm incurs at most k + n/k cache misses, the

competitive ratio is at least

For n k2, the above expression is at least

Thus, for sufficiently long request sequences, we have shown the
following:

Theorem 27.4
Any deterministic online algorithm for caching with a cache size of k
has competitive ratio (k).

Although we can analyze the common caching strategies from the
point of view of competitive analysis, the results are somewhat
unsatisfying. Yes, we can distinguish between algorithms with a

competitive ratio of (k) and those with unbounded competitive ratios.

In the end, however, all of these competitive ratios are rather high. The
online algorithms we have seen so far are deterministic, and it is this
property that the adversary is able to exploit.

27.3.2 Randomized caching algorithms

If we don't limit ourselves to deterministic online algorithms, we can use
randomization to develop an online caching algorithm with a
significantly smaller competitive ratio. Before describing the algorithm,
let's discuss randomization in online algorithms in general. Recall that
we analyze online algorithms with respect to an adversary who knows
the online algorithm and can design requests knowing the decisions
made by the online algorithm. With randomization, we must ask
whether the adversary also knows the random choices made by the
online algorithm. An adversary who does not know the random choices

is oblivious, and an adversary who knows the random choices is
nonoblivious. Ideally, we prefer to design algorithms against a

nonoblivious adversary, as this adversary is stronger than an oblivious
one. Unfortunately, a nonoblivious adversary mitigates much of the
power of randomness, as an adversary who knows the outcome of
random choices typically can act as if the online algorithm is
deterministic. The oblivious adversary, on the other hand, does not
know the random choices of the online algorithm, and that is the
adversary we typically use.

As a simple illustration of the difference between an oblivious and

nonoblivious adversary, imagine that you are flipping a fair coin n times,

and the adversary wants to know how many heads you flipped. A
nonoblivious adversary knows, after each flip, whether the coin came
up heads or tails, and hence knows how many heads you flipped. An
oblivious adversary, on the other hand, knows only that you are flipping

a fair coin n times. The oblivious adversary, therefore, can reason that

the number of heads follows a binomial distribution, so that the

expected number of heads is n/2 (by equation (C.41) on page 1199) and
the variance is n/4 (by equation (C.44) on page 1200). But the oblivious

adversary has no way of knowing exactly how many heads you actually
flipped.

Let's return to caching. We'll start with a deterministic algorithm
and then randomize it. The algorithm we'll use is an approximation of
LRU called MARKING. Rather than "least recently used," think of
MARKING as simply "recently used." MARKING maintains a 1-bit

attribute mark for each block in the cache. Initially, all blocks in the

cache are unmarked. When a block is requested, if it is already in the
cache, it is marked. If the request is a cache miss, MARKING checks to
see whether there are any unmarked blocks in the cache. If all blocks
are marked, then they are all changed to unmarked. Now, regardless of
whether all blocks in the cache were marked when the request occurred,
there is at least one unmarked block in the cache, and so an arbitrary
unmarked block is evicted, and the requested block is placed into the
cache and marked.

How should the block to evict from among the unmarked blocks in
the cache be chosen? The procedure RANDOMIZED-MARKING on
the next page shows the process when the block is chosen randomly.

The procedure takes as input a block b being requested.

RANDOMIZED-MARKING(b)

1if block b resides in the cache,
2 b.mark = 1

3else

4 if all blocks b in the cache have b.mark = 1

5 unmark all blocks b in the cache, setting b.mark = 0

6 select an unmarked block u with u.mark = 0 uniformly at random

7 evict block u

8 place block b into the cache

9 b.mark = 1

For the purpose of analysis, we say that a new epoch begins
immediately after each time line 5 executes. An epoch starts with no
marked blocks in the cache. The first time a block is requested during
an epoch, the number of marked blocks increases by 1, and any
subsequent requests to that block do not change the number of marked
blocks. Therefore, the number of marked blocks monotonically
increases within an epoch. Under this view, epochs are the same as in

the proof of Theorem 27.3: with a cache that holds k blocks, an epoch
comprises requests for k distinct blocks (possibly fewer for the final

epoch), and the next epoch begins upon a request for a block not in

those k.

Because we are going to analyze a randomized algorithm, we will

compute the expected competitive ratio. Recall that for an input I, we
denote the solution value of an online algorithm A by A(I) and the
solution value of an optimal algorithm F by F(I). Online algorithm A
has an expected competitive ratio c if for all inputs I, we have

where the expectation is taken over the random choices made by A.

Although the deterministic MARKING algorithm has a competitive

ratio of (k) (Theorem 27.4 provides the lower bound and see Exercise

27.3-4 for the upper bound), RANDOMIZED-MARKING has a much

smaller expected competitive ratio, namely O(lg k). The key to the

improved competitive ratio is that the adversary cannot always make a
request for a block that is not in the cache, since an oblivious adversary
does not know which blocks are in the cache.

Theorem 27.5

RANDOMIZED-MARKING has an expected competitive ratio of

O(lg k) for the online caching problem with n requests and a cache of
size k, against an oblivious adversary.

Before proving Theorem 27.5, we prove a basic probabilistic fact.

Lemma 27.6
Suppose that a bag contains x + y balls: x - 1 blue balls, y white balls,

and 1 red ball. You repeatedly choose a ball at random and remove it

from the bag until you have chosen a total of m balls that are either blue
or red, where m x. You set aside each white ball you choose. Then, one
of the balls chosen is the red ball with probability m/x.

Proof Choosing a white ball does not affect how many blue or red balls

are chosen in any way. Therefore, we can continue the analysis as if

there were no white balls and the bag contains just x - 1 blue balls and

1 red ball.

Let A be the event that the red ball is not chosen, and let Ai be the
event that the ith draw does not choose the red ball. By equation (C.22)

on page 1190, we have

The probability Pr{A1} that the first ball is blue equals (x - 1)/x, since
initially there are x - 1 blue balls and 1 red ball. More generally, we

have

since the ith draw is from x - i blue balls and 1 red ball. Equations

(27.13) and (27.14) give

The right-hand side of equation (27.15) is a telescoping product, similar
to the telescoping series in equation (A.12) on page 1143. The
numerator of one term equals the denominator of the next, so that
everything except the first denominator and last numerator cancel, and

we obtain Pr{A} = (x - m)/x. Since we actually want to compute Pr{}
= 1 - Pr{A}, that is, the probability that the red ball is chosen, we get
Pr{} = 1 - (x - m)/x = m/x.

Now we can prove Theorem 27.5.

Proof We'll analyze RANDOMIZED-MARKING one epoch at a
time. Within epoch i, any request for a block b that is not the first
request for block b in epoch i must result in a cache hit, since after the
first request in epoch i, block b resides in the cache and is marked, so

that it cannot be evicted during the epoch. Therefore, since we are
counting cache misses, we'll consider only the first request for each
block within each epoch, disregarding all other requests.

We can classify the requests in an epoch as either old or new. If

block b resides in the cache at the start of epoch i, each request for
block b during epoch i is an old request. Old requests in epoch i are for
blocks requested in epoch i - 1. If a request in epoch i is not old, it is a
new request, and it is for a block not requested in epoch i - 1. All

requests in epoch 1 are new. For example, let's look again at the request

sequence in example (27.11):

1, 2, 1, 5 4, 4, 1, 2, 4, 2 3, 4, 5 2, 2, 1, 2, 2.

Since we can disregard all requests for a block within an epoch other
than the first request, to analyze the cache behavior, we can view this
request sequence as just

1, 2, 5 4, 1, 2 3, 4, 5 2, 1.

All three requests in epoch 1 are new. In epoch 2, the requests for
blocks 1 and 2 are old, but the request for block 4 is new. In epoch 3,
the request for block 4 is old, and the requests for blocks 3 and 5 are
new. Both requests in epoch 4 are new.

Within an epoch, each new request must cause a cache miss since, by
definition, the block is not already in the cache. An old request, on the
other hand, may or may not cause a cache miss. The old block is in the
cache at the beginning of the epoch, but other requests might cause it
to be evicted. Returning to our example, in epoch 2, the request for
block 4 must cause a cache miss, as this request is new. The request for
block 1, which is old, may or may not cause a cache miss. If block 1 was
evicted when block 4 was requested, then a cache miss occurs and block
1 must be brought back into the cache. If instead block 1 was not
evicted when block 4 was requested, then the request for block 1 results
in a cache hit. The request for block 2 could incur a cache miss under
two scenarios. One is if block 2 was evicted when block 4 was requested.
The other is if block 1 was evicted when block 4 was requested, and
then block 2 was evicted when block 1 was requested. We see that,
within an epoch, each ensuing old request has an increasing chance of
causing a cache miss.

Because we consider only the first request for each block within an

epoch, we assume that each epoch contains exactly k requests, and each

request within an epoch is for a unique block. (The last epoch might

contain fewer than k requests. If it does, just add dummy requests to fill
it out to k requests.) In epoch i, denote the number of new requests by
ri 1 (an epoch must contain at least one new request), so that the
number of old requests is k - ri. As mentioned above, a new request

always incurs a cache miss.

Let us now focus on an arbitrary epoch i to obtain a bound on the

expected number of cache misses within that epoch. In particular, let's

think about the jth old request within the epoch, where 1 j < k.
Denote by bij the block requested in the jth old request of epoch i, and
denote by nij and oij the number of new and old requests, respectively,
that occur within epoch i but before the jth old request. Because j - 1
old requests occur before the jth old request, we have oij = j - 1. We will
show that the probability of a cache miss upon the j th old request is
nij/(k - oij), or nij/(k - j + 1).

Start by considering the first old request, for block bi,1. What is the

probability that this request causes a cache miss? It causes a cache miss

precisely when one of the ni,1 previous requests resulted in bi,1 being
evicted. We can determine the probability that bi,1 was chosen for
eviction by using Lemma 27.6: consider the k blocks in the cache to be
k balls, with block bi,1 as the red ball, the other k - 1 blocks as the k -
1 blue balls, and no white balls. Each of the ni,1 requests chooses a

block to evict with equal probability, corresponding to drawing balls

ni,1 times. Thus, we can apply Lemma 27.6 with x = k, y = 0, and m =
ni,1, deriving the probability of a cache miss upon the first old request
as ni,1/k, which equals nij/(k - j + 1) since j = 1.

In order to determine the probability of a cache miss for subsequent

old requests, we'll need an additional observation. Let's consider the

second old request, which is for block bi,2. This request causes a cache
miss precisely when one of the previous requests evicts bi,2. Let's

consider two cases, based on the request for bi,1. In the first case,
suppose that the request for bi,1 did not cause an eviction, because bi,1
was already in the cache. Then, the only way that bi,2 could have been
evicted is by one of the ni,2 new requests that precedes it. What is the
probability that this eviction happens? There are ni,2 chances for bi,2 to

be evicted, but we also know that there is one block in the cache,

namely bi,1, that is not evicted. Thus, we can again apply Lemma 27.6,
but with bi,1 as the white ball, bi,2 as the red ball, the remaining blocks
as the blue balls, and drawing balls ni,2 times. Applying Lemma 27.6,
with x = k - 1, y = 1, and m = ni,2, we find that the probability of a
cache miss is ni,2/(k - 1). In the second case, the request for bi,1 does

cause an eviction, which can happen only if one of the new requests

preceding the request for bi,1 evicts bi,1. Then, the request for bi,1
brings bi,1 back into the cache and evicts some other block. In this case,
we know that of the new requests, one of them did not result in bi,2
being evicted, since bi,1 was evicted. Therefore, ni,2 - 1 new requests
could evict bi,2, as could the request for bi,1, so that the number of
requests that could evict bi,2 is ni,2. Each such request evicts a block
chosen from among k - 1 blocks, since the request that resulted in
evicting bi,1 did not also cause bi,2 to be evicted. Therefore, we can
apply Lemma 27.6, with x = k - 1, y = 1, and m = ni,2, and get that the
probability of a miss is ni,2/(k - 1). In both cases the probability is the
same, and it equals nij/(k - j + 1) since j = 2.

More generally, oij old requests occur before the jth old request.

Each of these prior old requests either caused an eviction or did not.

For those that caused an eviction, it is because they were evicted by a

previous request, and for those that did not cause an eviction, it is

because they were not evicted by any previous request. In either case,

we can decrease the number of blocks that the random process is

choosing from by 1 for each old request, and thus oij requests cannot
cause bij to be evicted. Therefore, we can use Lemma 27.6 to determine

the probability that bij was evicted by a previous request, with x = k -
oij, y = oij and m = nij. Thus, we have proven our claim that the
probability of a cache miss on the jth request for an old block is nij/(k -
oij), or nij/(k - j + 1). Since nij ri (recall that ri is the number of new
requests during epoch i), we have an upper bound of ri/(k - j + 1) on
the probability that the jth old request incurs a cache miss.

We can now compute the expected number of misses during epoch i

using indicator random variables, as introduced in Section 5.2. We
define indicator random variables

Yij = I{the jth old request in epoch i incurs a cache miss},
Zij = I{the j th new request in epoch i incurs a cache miss}.
We have Zij = 1 for j = 1, 2, ... , ri, since every new request results in a
cache miss. Let Xi be the random variable denoting the number of
cache misses during epoch i, so that

and so

where Hk is the kth harmonic number.

To compute the expected total number of cache misses, we sum over

all epochs. Let p denote the number of epochs and X be the random

variable denoting the number of cache misses. Then, we have ,

so that

To complete the analysis, we need to understand the behavior of the

optimal offline algorithm. It could make a completely different set of

decisions from those made by RANDOMIZED-MARKING, and at

any point its cache may look nothing like the cache of the randomized

algorithm. Yet, we want to relate the number of cache misses of the

optimal offline algorithm to the value in inequality (27.17), in order to

have a competitive ratio that does not depend on . Focusing on

individual epochs won't suffice. At the beginning of any epoch, the

offline algorithm might have loaded the cache with exactly the blocks

that will be requested in that epoch. Therefore, we cannot take any one

epoch in isolation and claim that an offline algorithm must suffer any

cache misses during that epoch.

If we consider two consecutive epochs, however, we can better

analyze the optimal offline algorithm. Consider two consecutive epochs,

i -1 and i. Each contains k requests for k different blocks. (Recall our

assumption that all requests are first requests in an epoch.) Epoch i

contains ri requests for new blocks, that is, blocks that were not

requested during epoch i - 1. Therefore, the number of distinct requests

during epochs i-1 and i is exactly k+ri. No matter what the cache

contents were at the beginning of epoch i - 1, after k + ri distinct

requests, there must be at least ri cache misses. There could be more,

but there is no way to have fewer. Letting mi denote the number of

cache misses of the offline algorithm during epoch i, we have just

argued that

The total number of cache misses of the offline algorithm is

The justification m1 = r1 for the last equality follows because, by our

assumptions, the cache starts out empty and every request incurs a

cache miss in the first epoch, even for the optimal offline adversary.

To conclude the analysis, because we have an upper bound of

on the expected number of cache misses for RANDOMIZED-

MARKING and a lower bound of on the number of cache

misses for the optimal offline algorithm, the expected competitive ratio

is at most

Exercises

27.3-1

For the cache sequence (27.10), show the contents of the cache after
each request and count the number of cache misses. How many misses
does each epoch incur?

27.3-2
Show that LFU has a competitive ratio of (n/k) for the online caching
problem with n requests and a cache of size k.

27.3-3
Show that FIFO has a competitive ratio of O(k) for the online caching
problem with n requests and a cache of size k.

27.3-4

Show that the deterministic MARKING algorithm has a competitive

ratio of O(k) for the online caching problem with n requests and a cache
of size k.

27.3-5

Theorem 27.4 shows that any deterministic online algorithm for caching

has a competitive ratio of (k), where k is the cache size. One way in

which an algorithm might be able to perform better is to have some
ability to know what the next few requests will be. We say that an

algorithm is l-lookahead if it has the ability to look ahead at the next l
requests. Prove that for every constant l 0 and every cache size k 1,
every deterministic l-lookahead algorithm has competitive ratio (k).

Problems

27-1 Cow-path problem

The Appalachian Trail (AT) is a marked hiking trail in the eastern
United States extending between Springer Mountain in Georgia and
Mount Katahdin in Maine. The trail is about 2,190 miles long. You
decide that you are going to hike the AT from Georgia to Maine and
back. You plan to learn more about algorithms while on the trail, and

so you bring along your copy of Introduction to Algorithms in your

backpack.2 You have already read through this chapter before starting
out. Because the beauty of the trail distracts you, you forget about
reading this book until you have reached Maine and hiked halfway back
to Georgia. At that point, you decide that you have already seen the

trail and want to continue reading the rest of the book, starting with

Chapter 28. Unfortunately, you find that the book is no longer in your

pack. You must have left it somewhere along the trail, but you don't

know where. It could be anywhere between Georgia and Maine. You

want to find the book, but now that you have learned something about

online algorithms, you want your algorithm for finding it to have a good

competitive ratio. That is, no matter where the book is, if its distance

from you is x miles away, you would like to be sure that you do not walk
more than cx miles to find it, for some constant c. You do not know x,
though you may assume that x 1.3

What algorithm should you use, and what constant c can you prove
bounds the total distance cx that you would have to walk? Your

algorithm should work for a trail of any length, not just the 2,190-mile-

long AT.

27-2 Online scheduling to minimize average completion time

Problem 15-2 discusses scheduling to minimize average completion time

on one machine, without release times and preemption and with release

times and preemption. Now you will develop an online algorithm for

nonpreemptively scheduling a set of tasks with release times. Suppose

you are given a set S = {a1, a2, ... , an} of tasks, where task ai has

release time ri, before which it cannot start, and requires pi units of

processing time to complete once it has started. You have one computer

on which to run the tasks. Tasks cannot be preempted, which is to say

that once started, a task must run to completion without interruption.

(See Problem 15-2 on page 446 for a more detailed description of this

problem.) Given a schedule, let Ci be the completion time of task ai, that

is, the time at which task ai completes processing. Your goal is to find a

schedule that minimizes the average completion time, that is, to

minimize .

In the online version of this problem, you learn about task i only

when it arrives at its release time ri, and at that point, you know its

processing time pi. The offline version of this problem is NP-hard (see

Chapter 34), but you will develop a 2-competitive online algorithm.

a. Show that, if there are release times, scheduling by shortest

processing time (when the machine becomes idle, start the already

released task with the smallest processing time that has not yet run) is

not d-competitive for any constant d.

In order to develop an online algorithm, consider the preemptive
version of this problem, which is discussed in Problem 15-2(b). One way
to schedule is to run the tasks according to the shortest remaining
processing time (SRPT) order. That is, at any point, the machine is
running the available task with the smallest amount of remaining
processing time.

b. Explain how to run SRPT as an online algorithm.

c. Suppose that you run SRPT and obtain completion times .

Show that

where the are the completion times in an optimal nonpreemptive
schedule.

Consider the (offline) algorithm COMPLETION-TIME-SCHEDULE.

COMPLETION-TIME-SCHEDULE(S)

1 compute an optimal schedule for the preemptive version of the
problem

2 renumber the tasks so that the completion times in the optimal
preemptive schedule are ordered by their completion times
in SRPT order

3 greedily schedule the tasks nonpreemptively in the renumbered

order a1, ... , an
4 let C1, ... , Cn be the completion times of renumbered tasks a1, ... ,

an in this nonpreemptive schedule
5 return C1, ... , Cn

d. Prove that for i = 1, ... , n.

e. Prove that for i = 1, ... , n.

f. Algorithm COMPLETION-TIME-SCHEDULE is an offline

algorithm. Explain how to modify it to produce an online algorithm.

g. Combine parts (c)(f) to show that the online version of

COMPLETION-TIME-SCHEDULE is 2-competitive.

Chapter notes

Online algorithms are widely used in many domains. Some good
overviews include the textbook by Borodin and El-Yaniv [68], the
collection of surveys edited by Fiat and Woeginger [142], and the survey
by Albers [14].

The move-to-front heuristic from Section 27.2 was analyzed by
Sleator and Tarjan [416, 417] as part of their early work on amortized
analysis. This rule works quite well in practice.

Competitive analysis of online caching also originated with Sleator
and Tarjan [417]. The randomized marking algorithm was proposed and
analyzed by Fiat et al. [141]. Young [464] surveys online caching and
paging algorithms, and Buchbinder and Naor [76] survey primal-dual
online algorithms.

Specific types of online algorithms are described using other names.

Dynamic graph algorithms are online algorithms on graphs, where at

each step a vertex or edge undergoes modification. Typically a vertex or
edge is either inserted or deleted, or some associated property, such as
edge weight, changes. Some graph problems need to be solved again
after each change to the graph, and a good dynamic graph algorithm
will not need to solve from scratch. For example, edges are inserted and
deleted, and after each change to the graph, the minimum spanning tree
is recomputed. Exercise 21.2-8 asks such a question. Similar questions
can be asked for other graph algorithms, such as shortest paths,
connectivity, or matching. The first paper in this field is credited to
Even and Shiloach [138], who study how to maintain a shortest-path

tree as edges are being deleted from a graph. Since then hundreds of
papers have been published. Demetrescu et al. [110] survey early
developments in dynamic graph algorithms.

For massive data sets, the input data might be too large to store.

Streaming algorithms model this situation by requiring the memory

used by an algorithm to be significantly smaller than the input size. For

example, you may have a graph with n vertices and m edges with m n,
but the memory allowed may be only O(n). Or you may have n numbers,
but the memory allowed may only be O(lg n) or . A streaming

algorithm is measured by the number of passes made over the data in
addition to the running time of the algorithm. McGregor [322] surveys
streaming algorithms for graphs and Muthukrishnan [341] surveys
general streaming algorithms.

1 The path-compression heuristic in Section 19.3 resembles MOVE-TO-FRONT, although it
would be more accurately expressed as "move-to-next-to-front." Unlike MOVE-TO-FRONT
in a doubly linked list, path compression can relocate multiple elements to become "next-tofront."

2 This book is heavy. We do not recommend that you carry it on a long hike.
3 In case you're wondering what this problem has to do with cows, some papers about it frame
the problem as a cow looking for a field in which to graze.

28 Matrix Operations

Because operations on matrices lie at the heart of scientific computing,
efficient algorithms for working with matrices have many practical
applications. This chapter focuses on how to multiply matrices and
solve sets of simultaneous linear equations. Appendix D reviews the
basics of matrices.

Section 28.1 shows how to solve a set of linear equations using LUP
decompositions. Then, Section 28.2 explores the close relationship
between multiplying and inverting matrices. Finally, Section 28.3
discusses the important class of symmetric positive-definite matrices
and shows how to use them to find a least-squares solution to an
overdetermined set of linear equations.

One important issue that arises in practice is numerical stability.

Because actual computers have limits to how precisely they can
represent floating-point numbers, round-off errors in numerical
computations may become amplified over the course of a computation,

leading to incorrect results. Such computations are called numerically
unstable. Although we'll briefly consider numerical stability on occasion,

we won't focus on it in this chapter. We refer you to the excellent book
by Higham [216] for a thorough discussion of stability issues.