28.2 Inverting matrices

Although you can use equation (28.3) to solve a system of linear
equations by computing a matrix inverse, in practice you are better off
using more numerically stable techniques, such as LUP decomposition.
Sometimes, however, you really do need to compute a matrix inverse.
This section shows how to use LUP decomposition to compute a matrix
inverse. It also proves that matrix multiplication and computing the
inverse of a matrix are equivalently hard problems, in that (subject to
technical conditions) an algorithm for one can solve the other in the
same asymptotic running time. Thus, you can use Strassen's algorithm
(see Section 4.2) for matrix multiplication to invert a matrix. Indeed,
Strassen's original paper was motivated by the idea that a set of a linear
equations could be solved more quickly than by the usual method.

Computing a matrix inverse from an LUP decomposition

Suppose that you have an LUP decomposition of a matrix A in the form
of three matrices L, U, and P such that PA = LU. Using LUP-SOLVE,
you can solve an equation of the form Ax = b in (n2) time. Since the
LUP decomposition depends on A but not b, you can run LUP-SOLVE
on a second set of equations of the form Ax = b in (n2) additional
time. In general, once you have the LUP decomposition of A, you can
solve, in (kn2) time, k versions of the equation Ax = b that differ only
in the vector b.

Let's think of the equation

which defines the matrix X, the inverse of A, as a set of n distinct
equations of the form Ax = b. To be precise, let Xi denote the ith
column of X, and recall that the unit vector ei is the ith column of In.

You can then solve equation (28.11) for X by using the LUP
decomposition for A to solve each equation

AXi = ei
separately for Xi. Once you have the LUP decomposition, you can
compute each of the n columns Xi in (n2) time, and so you can
compute X from the LUP decomposition of A in (n3) time. Since you
find the LUP decomposition of A in (n3) time, you can compute the
inverse A-1 of a matrix A in (n3) time.

Matrix multiplication and matrix inversion

Now let's see how the theoretical speedups obtained for matrix
multiplication translate to speedups for matrix inversion. In fact, we'll
prove something stronger: matrix inversion is equivalent to matrix

multiplication, in the following sense. If M(n) denotes the time to
multiply two n × n matrices, then a nonsingular n × n matrix can be
inverted in O(M(n)) time. Moreover, if I(n) denotes the time to invert a
nonsingular n × n matrix, then two n × n matrices can be multiplied in
O(I(n)) time. We prove these results as two separate theorems.

Theorem 28.1 (Multiplication is no harder than inversion)
If an n × n matrix can be inverted in I(n) time, where I(n) = (n2) and
I(n) satisfies the regularity condition I(3n) = O(I(n)), then two n × n
matrices can be multiplied in O(I(n)) time.

Proof Let A and B be n × n matrices. To compute their product C =
AB, define the 3n × 3n matrix D by

The inverse of D is

and thus to compute the product AB, just take the upper right n × n
submatrix of D-1.

Constructing matrix D takes (n2) time, which is O(I(n)) from the
assumption that I(n) = (n2), and inverting D takes O(I(3n)) = O(I(n))
time, by the regularity condition on I(n). We thus have M(n) = O(I(n)).

Note that I(n) satisfies the regularity condition whenever I(n) = (nc
lgdn) for any constants c > 0 and d 0.

The proof that matrix inversion is no harder than matrix
multiplication relies on some properties of symmetric positive-definite
matrices proved in Section 28.3.

Theorem 28.2 (Inversion is no harder than multiplication)
Suppose that two n × n real matrices can be multiplied in M(n) time,
where M(n) = (n2) and M(n) satisfies the following two regularity

conditions:

1. M(n + k) = O(M(n)) for any k in the range 0 k < n, and
2. M(n/2) cM(n) for some constant c < 1/2.

Then the inverse of any real nonsingular n×n matrix can be computed in
O(M(n)) time.

Proof Let A be an n × n matrix with real-valued entries that is
nonsingular. Assume that n is an exact power of 2 (i.e., n = 2l for some
integer l); we'll see at the end of the proof what to do if n is not an exact

power of 2.

For the moment, assume that the n × n matrix A is symmetric and
positive-definite. Partition each of A and its inverse A-1 into four n/2 ×
n/2 submatrices:

Then, if we let

be the Schur complement of A with respect to B (we'll see more about

this form of Schur complement in Section 28.3), we have

since AA-1 = In, as you can verify by performing the matrix
multiplication. Because A is symmetric and positive-definite, Lemmas
28.4 and 28.5 in Section 28.3 imply that B and S are both symmetric

and positive-definite. By Lemma 28.3 in Section 28.3, therefore, the

inverses B-1 and S-1 exist, and by Exercise D.2-6 on page 1223, B-1
and S-1 are symmetric, so that (B-1)T = B-1 and (S-1)T = S-1.

Therefore, to compute the submatrices

R = B-1 + B-1CTS-1CB-1,
T = -B-1CTS-1,
U = -S-1CB-1, and
V = S-1

of A-1, do the following, where all matrices mentioned are n/2 × n/2:

1. Form the submatrices B, C, CT, and D of A.
2. Recursively compute the inverse B-1 of B.
3. Compute the matrix product W = CB-1, and then compute its

transpose WT, which equals B-1CT (by Exercise D.1-2 on page
1219 and (B-1)T = B-1).
4. Compute the matrix product X = WCT, which equals CB-1CT,
and then compute the matrix S = D - X = D - CB-1CT.
5. Recursively compute the inverse S-1 of S.

6. Compute the matrix product Y = S-1W, which equals
S-1CB-1, and then compute its transpose YT, which equals
B-1CTS-1 (by Exercise D.1-2, (B-1)T = B-1, and (S-1)T =
S-1).

7. Compute the matrix product Z = WTY, which equals
B-1CTS-1CB-1.

8. Set R = B-1 + Z.

9. Set T = -YT.
10. Set U = -Y.

11. Set V = S-1.

Thus, to invert an n×n symmetric positive-definite matrix, invert two
n/2×n/2 matrices in steps 2 and 5; perform four multiplications of n/2 ×
n/2 matrices in steps 3, 4, 6, and 7; plus incur an additional cost of
O(n2) for extracting submatrices from A, inserting submatrices into
A-1, and performing a constant number of additions, subtractions, and
transposes on n/2 × n/2 matrices. The running time is given by the

recurrence

The second line follows from the assumption that M(n) = (n2) and

from the second regularity condition in the statement of the theorem,

which implies that 4M(n/2) < 2M(n). Because M(n) = (n2), case 3 of

the master theorem (Theorem 4.1) applies to the recurrence (28.15),

giving the O(M(n)) result.

It remains to prove how to obtain the same asymptotic running time

for matrix multiplication as for matrix inversion when A is invertible but

not symmetric and positive-definite. The basic idea is that for any

nonsingular matrix A, the matrix ATA is symmetric (by Exercise D.1-2)

and positive-definite (by Theorem D.6 on page 1222). The trick, then, is

to reduce the problem of inverting A to the problem of inverting ATA.
The reduction is based on the observation that when A is an n × n

nonsingular matrix, we have

A-1 = (ATA)-1AT,

since ((ATA)-1AT)A = (ATA)-1(ATA) = In and a matrix inverse is
unique. Therefore, to compute A-1, first multiply AT by A to obtain
ATA, then invert the symmetric positive-definite matrix ATA using the

above divide-and-conquer algorithm, and finally multiply the result by

AT. Each of these three steps takes O(M(n)) time, and thus any
nonsingular matrix with real entries can be inverted in O(M(n)) time.

The above proof assumed that A is an n × n matrix, where n is an
exact power of 2. If n is not an exact power of 2, then let k < n be such
that n + k is an exact power of 2, and define the (n + k) × (n + k) matrix
A as

Then the inverse of A is

Apply the method of the proof to A to compute the inverse of A, and
take the first n rows and n columns of the result as the desired answer
A-1. The first regularity condition on M(n) ensures that enlarging the

matrix in this way increases the running time by at most a constant
factor.

The proof of Theorem 28.2 suggests how to solve the equation Ax =
b by using LU decomposition without pivoting, so long as A is
nonsingular. Let y = ATb. Multiply both sides of the equation Ax = b
by AT, yielding (ATA)x = ATb = y. This transformation doesn't affect

the solution x, since AT is invertible. Because ATA is symmetric

positive-definite, it can be factored by computing an LU decomposition.

Then, use forward and back substitution to solve for x in the equation
(ATA)x = y. Although this method is theoretically correct, in practice

the procedure LUP-DECOMPOSITION works much better. LUP
decomposition requires fewer arithmetic operations by a constant
factor, and it has somewhat better numerical properties.

Exercises

28.2-1
Let M(n) be the time to multiply two n × n matrices, and let S(n) denote
the time required to square an n × n matrix. Show that multiplying and
squaring matrices have essentially the same difficulty: an M(n)-time
matrix-multiplication algorithm implies an O(M(n))-time squaring
algorithm, and an S(n)-time squaring algorithm implies an O(S(n))-time

matrix-multiplication algorithm.

28.2-2
Let M(n) be the time to multiply two n × n matrices. Show that an
M(n)-time matrix-multiplication algorithm implies an O(M(n))-time

LUP-decomposition algorithm. (The LUP decomposition your method
produces need not be the same as the result produced by the LUPDECOMPOSITION procedure.)

28.2-3
Let M(n) be the time to multiply two n × n boolean matrices, and let
T(n) be the time to find the transitive closure of an n × n boolean
matrix. (See Section 23.2.) Show that an M(n)-time boolean matrixmultiplication algorithm implies an O(M(n) lg n)-time transitive-closure
algorithm, and a T(n)-time transitive-closure algorithm implies an O(T
(n))-time boolean matrix-multiplication algorithm.

28.2-4

Does the matrix-inversion algorithm based on Theorem 28.2 work when
matrix elements are drawn from the field of integers modulo 2? Explain.

28.2-5

Generalize the matrix-inversion algorithm of Theorem 28.2 to handle
matrices of complex numbers, and prove that your generalization works

correctly. (Hint: Instead of the transpose of A, use the conjugate
transpose A*, which you obtain from the transpose of A by replacing

every entry with its complex conjugate. Instead of symmetric matrices,

consider Hermitian matrices, which are matrices A such that A = A*.)