28.3 Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squares
approximation

Symmetric positive-definite matrices have many interesting and

desirable properties. An n × n matrix A is symmetric positive-definite if A
= AT(A is symmetric) and xTAx > 0 for all n-vectors x 0 (A is

positive-definite). Symmetric positive-definite matrices are nonsingular,
and an LU decomposition on them will not divide by 0. This section
proves these and several other important properties of symmetric
positive-definite matrices. We'll also see an interesting application to
curve fitting by a least-squares approximation.

The first property we prove is perhaps the most basic.

Lemma 28.3

Any positive-definite matrix is nonsingular.

Proof Suppose that a matrix A is singular. Then by Corollary D.3 on
page 1221, there exists a nonzero vector x such that Ax = 0. Hence,
xTAx = 0, and A cannot be positive-definite.

The proof that an LU decomposition on a symmetric positive-

definite matrix A won't divide by 0 is more involved. We begin by
proving properties about certain submatrices of A. Define the kth
leading submatrix of A to be the matrix Ak consisting of the intersection
of the first k rows and first k columns of A.

Lemma 28.4
If A is a symmetric positive-definite matrix, then every leading
submatrix of A is symmetric and positive-definite.

Proof Since A is symmetric, each leading submatrix Ak is also
symmetric. We'll prove that Ak is positive-definite by contradiction. If
Ak is not positive-definite, then there exists a k-vector xk 0 such that

. Let A be n × n, and

for submatrices B (which is (n-k)×k) and C (which is (n-k)×(n-k)).

Define the n-vector , where n - k 0s follow xk. Then we have

which contradicts A being positive-definite.

We now turn to some essential properties of the Schur complement.

Let A be a symmetric positive-definite matrix, and let Ak be a leading k
× k submatrix of A. Partition A once again according to equation
(28.16). Equation (28.10) generalizes to define the Schur complement S
of A with respect to Ak as

(By Lemma 28.4, Ak is symmetric and positive-definite, and therefore,
exists by Lemma 28.3, and S is well defined.) The earlier definition

(28.10) of the Schur complement is consistent with equation (28.17) by

letting k = 1.

The next lemma shows that the Schur-complement matrices of
symmetric positive-definite matrices are themselves symmetric and

positive-definite. We used this result in Theorem 28.2, and its corollary
will help prove that LU decomposition works for symmetric positivedefinite matrices.

Lemma 28.5 (Schur complement lemma)
If A is a symmetric positive-definite matrix and Ak is a leading k × k
submatrix of A, then the Schur complement S of A with respect to Ak is

symmetric and positive-definite.

Proof Because A is symmetric, so is the submatrix C. By Exercise D.2-

6 on page 1223, the product is symmetric. Since C and are

symmetric, then by Exercise D.1-1 on page 1219, so is S.

It remains to show that S is positive-definite. Consider the partition

of A given in equation (28.16). For any nonzero vector x, we have xTAx

> 0 by the assumption that A is positive-definite. Let the subvectors y

and z consist of the first k and last n - k elements in x, respectively, and

thus they are compatible with Ak and C, respectively. Because exists,

we have

This last equation, which you can verify by multiplying through,

amounts to "completing the square" of the quadratic form. (See

Exercise 28.3-2.)

Since xTAx > 0 holds for any nonzero x, pick any nonzero z and

then choose , which causes the first term in equation (28.18)

to vanish, leaving

as the value of the expression. For any z 0, we therefore have zTSz =
xTAx > 0, and thus S is positive-definite.

Corollary 28.6

LU decomposition of a symmetric positive-definite matrix never causes
a division by 0.

Proof Let A be an n × n symmetric positive-definite matrix. In fact,

we'll prove a stronger result than the statement of the corollary: every

pivot is strictly positive. The first pivot is a11. Let e1 be the length-n

unit vector ( 1 0 0 0 )T, so that , which is positive because

e1 is nonzero and A is positive definite. Since the first step of LU

decomposition produces the Schur complement of A with respect to A1

= (a11), Lemma 28.5 implies by induction that all pivots are positive.

Least-squares approximation

One important application of symmetric positive-definite matrices
arises in fitting curves to given sets of data points. You are given a set of

m data points

(x1, y1), (x2, y2), ... , (xm, ym),

where you know that the yi are subject to measurement errors. You wish
to determine a function F(x) such that the approximation errors

are small for i = 1, 2, ... , m. The form of the function F depends on the

problem at hand. Let's assume that it has the form of a linearly
weighted sum

where the number n of summands and the specific basis functions fj are

chosen based on knowledge of the problem at hand. A common choice

is fj(x) = xj-1, which means that

F(x) = c1 + c2x + c3x2 + + cnxn-1
is a polynomial of degree n - 1 in x. Thus, if you are given m data points
(x1, y1), (x2, y2), ... , (xm, ym), you need to calculate n coefficients c1,
c2, ... , cn that minimize the approximation errors 1, 2, ... , m.

By choosing n = m, you can calculate each yi exactly in equation
(28.19). Such a high-degree polynomial F "fits the noise" as well as the
data, however, and generally gives poor results when used to predict y
for previously unseen values of x. It is usually better to choose n
significantly smaller than m and hope that by choosing the coefficients
cj well, you can obtain a function F that finds the significant patterns in

the data points without paying undue attention to the noise. Some

theoretical principles exist for choosing n, but they are beyond the
scope of this text. In any case, once you choose a value of n that is less
than m, you end up with an overdetermined set of equations whose

solution you wish to approximate. Let's see how to do so.
Let

denote the matrix of values of the basis functions at the given points,

that is, aij = fj(xi). Let c = (ck) denote the desired n-vector of

coefficients. Then,

is the m-vector of "predicted values" for y. Thus,
= Ac - y

is the m-vector of approximation errors.

To minimize approximation errors, let's minimize the norm of the

error vector , which gives a least-squares solution, since

Because

to minimize , differentiate 2 with respect to each ck and then set

the result to 0:

The n equations (28.20) for k = 1, 2, ... , n are equivalent to the single

matrix equation

(Ac - y)T A = 0

or, equivalently (using Exercise D.1-2 on page 1219), to

AT(Ac - y) = 0,

which implies

In statistics, equation (28.21) is called the normal equation. The matrix
ATA is symmetric by Exercise D.1-2, and if A has full column rank,
then by Theorem D.6 on page 1222, ATA is positive-definite as well.
Hence, (ATA)-1 exists, and the solution to equation (28.21) is

where the matrix A+ = ((ATA)-1AT) is the pseudoinverse of the matrix
A. The pseudoinverse naturally generalizes the notion of a matrix

inverse to the case in which A is not square. (Compare equation (28.22)
as the approximate solution to Ac = y with the solution A-1b as the
exact solution to Ax = b.)

As an example of producing a least-squares fit, suppose that you
have five data points

(x1, y1) = (-1, 2),
(x2, y2) = (1, 1),
(x3, y3) = (2, 1),
(x4, y4) = (3, 0),
(x5, y5) = (5, 3),

shown as orange dots in Figure 28.3, and you want to fit these points
with a quadratic polynomial

F(x) = c1 + c2x + c3x2.

Start with the matrix of basis-function values

whose pseudoinverse is

Figure 28.3 The least-squares fit of a quadratic polynomial to the set of five data points {(-1,
2), (1, 1), (2, 1), (3, 0), (5, 3)}. The orange dots are the data points, and the blue dots are their

estimated values predicted by the polynomial F(x) = 1.2 - 0.757x + 0.214x2, the quadratic

polynomial that minimizes the sum of the squared errors, plotted in blue. Each orange line
shows the error for one data point.

Multiplying y by A+ gives the coefficient vector

which corresponds to the quadratic polynomial

F(x) = 1.200 - 0.757x + 0.214x2

as the closest-fitting quadratic to the given data, in a least-squares
sense.

As a practical matter, you would typically solve the normal equation

(28.21) by multiplying y by AT and then finding an LU decomposition
of ATA. If A has full rank, the matrix ATA is guaranteed to be

nonsingular, because it is symmetric and positive-definite. (See Exercise
D.1-2 and Theorem D.6.)

Figure 28.4 A least-squares fit of a curve of the form

c1 + c2x + c3x2 + c4 sin(2x) + c5 cos(2x)

for the carbon-dioxide concentrations measured in Mauna Loa, Hawaii from 19901 to 2019,

where x is the number of years elapsed since 1990. This curve is the famous "Keeling curve,"

illustrating curve-fitting to nonpolynomial formulas. The sine and cosine terms allow modeling
of seasonal variations in CO2 concentrations. The red curve shows the measured CO2
concentrations. The best fit, shown in black, has the form

352.83 + 1.39x + 0.02x2 + 2.83 sin(2x) - 0.94 cos(2x).

We close this section with an example in Figure 28.4, illustrating that
a curve can also fit a nonpolynomial function. The curve confirms one
aspect of climate change: that carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations
have steadily increased over a period of 29 years. Linear and quadratic
terms model the annual increase, and sine and cosine terms model
seasonal variations.
Exercises

28.3-1

Prove that every diagonal element of a symmetric positive-definite
matrix is positive.

28.3-2

Let be a 2 × 2 symmetric positive-definite matrix. Prove that

its determinant ac - b2 is positive by "completing the square" in a

manner similar to that used in the proof of Lemma 28.5.

28.3-3

Prove that the maximum element in a symmetric positive-definite matrix
lies on the diagonal.

28.3-4

Prove that the determinant of each leading submatrix of a symmetric
positive-definite matrix is positive.

28.3-5
Let Ak denote the kth leading submatrix of a symmetric positivedefinite matrix A. Prove that det(Ak)/det(Ak-1) is the kth pivot during
LU decomposition, where, by convention, det(A0) = 1.

28.3-6

Find the function of the form

F(x) = c1 + c2x lg x + c3ex

that is the best least-squares fit to the data points

(1, 1), (2, 1), (3, 3), (4, 8).

28.3-7
Show that the pseudoinverse A+ satisfies the following four equations:

AA+A = A,
A+AA+ = A+,

(AA+)T = AA+,
(A+A)T = A+A.

Problems

28-1 Tridiagonal systems of linear equations

Consider the tridiagonal matrix

a. Find an LU decomposition of A.
b. Solve the equation Ax = ( 1 1 1 1 1 )T by using forward and back

substitution.

c. Find the inverse of A.
d. Show how to solve the equation Ax = b for any n × n symmetric

positive-definite, tridiagonal matrix A and any n-vector b in O(n) time

by performing an LU decomposition. Argue that any method based

on forming A-1 is asymptotically more expensive in the worst case.
e. Show how to solve the equation Ax = b for any n × n nonsingular,

tridiagonal matrix A and any n-vector b in O(n) time by performing an

LUP decomposition.

28-2 Splines

A practical method for interpolating a set of points with a curve is to

use cubic splines. You are given a set {(xi, yi) : i = 0, 1, ... , n} of n + 1
point-value pairs, where x0 < x1 < < xn. Your goal is to fit a
piecewise-cubic curve (spline) f(x) to the points. That is, the curve f(x)
is made up of n cubic polynomials fi(x) = ai + bix + cix2 + dix3 for i =

0, 1, ... , n - 1, where if x falls in the range xi x xi+1, then the value
of the curve is given by f(x) = fi(x - xi). The points xi at which the
cubic polynomials are "pasted" together are called knots. For simplicity,
assume that xi = i for i = 0, 1, ... , n.

To ensure continuity of f(x), require that

f(xi) = fi(0) = yi,
f(xi+1) = fi(1) = yi+1

for i = 0, 1, ... , n - 1. To ensure that f(x) is sufficiently smooth, also

require the first derivative to be continuous at each knot:

for i = 0, 1, ... , n - 2.

a. Suppose that for i = 0, 1, ... , n, in addition to the point-value pairs
{(xi, yi)}, you are also given the first derivative Di = f(xi) at each
knot. Express each coefficient ai, bi, ci, and di in terms of the values
yi, yi+1, Di, and Di+1. (Remember that xi = i.) How quickly can you
compute the 4n coefficients from the point-value pairs and first

derivatives?

The question remains of how to choose the first derivatives of f(x) at

the knots. One method is to require the second derivatives to be
continuous at the knots:

for i = 0, 1, ... , n-2. At the first and last knots, assume that

and . These assumptions make f(x) a

natural cubic spline.

b. Use the continuity constraints on the second derivative to show that
for i = 1, 2, ... , n - 1,

c. Show that

d. Rewrite equations (28.23)(28.25) as a matrix equation involving the
vector D = (D0 D1 D2 Dn)T of unknowns. What attributes does

the matrix in your equation have?

e. Argue that a natural cubic spline can interpolate a set of n + 1 point-
value pairs in O(n) time (see Problem 28-1).

f. Show how to determine a natural cubic spline that interpolates a set
of n + 1 points (xi, yi) satisfying x0 < x1 < < xn, even when xi is
not necessarily equal to i. What matrix equation must your method

solve, and how quickly does your algorithm run?

Chapter notes

Many excellent texts describe numerical and scientific computation in
much greater detail than we have room for here. The following are
especially readable: George and Liu [180], Golub and Van Loan [192],
Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery [365, 366], and Strang [422,
423].

Golub and Van Loan [192] discuss numerical stability. They show

why det(A) is not necessarily a good indicator of the stability of a
matrix A, proposing instead to use A A-1, where

. They also address the question of how to

compute this value without actually computing A-1.

Gaussian elimination, upon which the LU and LUP decompositions
are based, was the first systematic method for solving linear systems of
equations. It was also one of the earliest numerical algorithms.
Although it was known earlier, its discovery is commonly attributed to
C. F. Gauss (17771855). In his famous paper [424], Strassen showed

that an n×n matrix can be inverted in O(nlg 7) time. Winograd [460]

originally proved that matrix multiplication is no harder than matrix
inversion, and the converse is due to Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5].

Another important matrix decomposition is the singular value
decomposition, or SVD. The SVD factors an m × n matrix A into

, where is an m×n matrix with nonzero values only on the
diagonal, Q1 is m×m with mutually orthonormal columns, and Q2 is n ×
n, also with mutually orthonormal columns. Two vectors are
orthonormal if their inner product is 0 and each vector has a norm of 1.

The books by Strang [422, 423] and Golub and Van Loan [192] contain
good treatments of the SVD.

Strang [423] has an excellent presentation of symmetric positivedefinite matrices and of linear algebra in general.

1 The year in which Introduction to Algorithms was first published.

29 Linear Programming

Many problems take the form of maximizing or minimizing an objective,
given limited resources and competing constraints. If you can specify
the objective as a linear function of certain variables, and if you can
specify the constraints on resources as equalities or inequalities on

those variables, then you have a linear-programming problem. Linear

programs arise in a variety of practical applications. We begin by
studying an application in electoral politics.

A political problem

Suppose that you are a politician trying to win an election. Your district
has three different types of areas--urban, suburban, and rural. These
areas have, respectively, 100,000, 200,000, and 50,000 registered voters.
Although not all the registered voters actually go to the polls, you
decide that to govern effectively, you would like at least half the
registered voters in each of the three regions to vote for you. You are
honorable and would never consider supporting policies you don't
believe in. You realize, however, that certain issues may be more
effective in winning votes in certain places. Your primary issues are
preparing for a zombie apocalypse, equipping sharks with lasers,
building highways for flying cars, and allowing dolphins to vote.

According to your campaign staff 's research, you can estimate how
many votes you win or lose from each population segment by spending
$1,000 on advertising on each issue. This information appears in the
table of Figure 29.1. In this table, each entry indicates the number of

thousands of either urban, suburban, or rural voters who would be won
over by spending $1,000 on advertising in support of a particular issue.
Negative entries denote votes that would be lost. Your task is to figure
out the minimum amount of money that you need to spend in order to
win 50,000 urban votes, 100,000 suburban votes, and 25,000 rural votes.

You could, by trial and error, devise a strategy that wins the required
number of votes, but the strategy you come up with might not be the
least expensive one. For example, you could devote $20,000 of
advertising to preparing for a zombie apocalypse, $0 to equipping
sharks with lasers, $4,000 to building highways for flying cars, and
$9,000 to allowing dolphins to vote. In this case, you would win (20 · -2)
+ (0 · 8) + (4 · 0) + (9 · 10) = 50 thousand urban votes, (20 · 5) + (0 · 2)
+ (4 · 0) + (9 · 0) = 100 thousand suburban votes, and (20 · 3) + (0 · -5)
+ (4 · 10) + (9 · -2) = 82 thousand rural votes. You would win the exact
number of votes desired in the urban and suburban areas and more
than enough votes in the rural area. (In fact, according to your model,
in the rural area you would receive more votes than there are voters.) In
order to garner these votes, you would have paid for 20 + 0 + 4 + 9 = 33
thousand dollars of advertising.

Figure 29.1 The effects of policies on voters. Each entry describes the number of thousands of
urban, suburban, or rural voters who could be won over by spending $1,000 on advertising
support of a policy on a particular issue. Negative entries denote votes that would be lost.

It's natural to wonder whether this strategy is the best possible. That
is, can you achieve your goals while spending less on advertising?
Additional trial and error might help you to answer this question, but a

better approach is to formulate (or model) this question mathematically.

The first step is to decide what decisions you have to make and to
introduce variables that capture these decisions. Since you have four

decisions, you introduce four decision variables:

x1 is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on

preparing for a zombie apocalypse,

x2 is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on

equipping sharks with lasers,

x3 is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on

building highways for flying cars, and

x4 is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on

allowing dolphins to vote.

You then think about constraints, which are limits, or restrictions, on

the values that the decision variables can take. You can write the
requirement that you win at least 50,000 urban votes as

Similarly, you can write the requirements that you win at least 100,000
suburban votes and 25,000 rural votes as

and

Any setting of the variables x1, x2, x3, x4 that satisfies inequalities

(29.1)(29.3) yields a strategy that wins a sufficient number of each type
of vote.

Finally, you think about your objective, which is the quantity that

you wish to either minimize or maximize. In order to keep costs as small
as possible, you would like to minimize the amount spent on advertising.
That is, you want to minimize the expression

Although negative advertising often occurs in political campaigns, there
is no such thing as negative-cost advertising. Consequently, you require
that

Combining inequalities (29.1)(29.3) and (29.5) with the objective of
minimizing (29.4) produces what is known as a "linear program." We
can format this problem tabularly as

subject to

The solution to this linear program yields your optimal strategy.
The remainder of this chapter covers how to formulate linear

programs and is an introduction to modeling in general. Modeling
refers to the general process of converting a problem into a
mathematical form amenable to solution by an algorithm. Section 29.1
discusses briefly the algorithmic aspects of linear programming,
although it does not include the details of a linear-programming
algorithm. Throughout this book, we have seen ways to model
problems, such as by shortest paths and connectivity in a graph. When
modeling a problem as a linear program, you go through the steps used
in this political example--identifying the decision variables, specifying
the constraints, and formulating the objective function. In order to
model a problem as a linear program, the constraints and objectives
must be linear. In Section 29.2, we will see several other examples of
modeling via linear programs. Section 29.3 discusses duality, an
important concept in linear programming and other optimization
algorithms.