29.1 Linear programming formulations and algorithms

Linear programs take a particular form, which we will examine in this
section. Multiple algorithms have been developed to solve linear
programs. Some run in polynomial time, some do not, but they are all
too complicated to show here. Instead, we will give an example that

demonstrates some ideas behind the simplex algorithm, which is
currently the most commonly deployed solution method.

General linear programs

In the general linear-programming problem, we wish to optimize a
linear function subject to a set of linear inequalities. Given a set of real

numbers a1, a2, ... , an and a set of variables x1, x2, ... , xn, we define a
linear function f on those variables by

If b is a real number and f is a linear function, then the equation

f(x1, x2, ... , xn) = b

is a linear equality and the inequalities

f(x1, x2, ... , xn) b and f(x1, x2, ... , xn) b

are linear inequalities. We use the general term linear constraints to

denote either linear equalities or linear inequalities. Linear

programming does not allow strict inequalities. Formally, a linearprogramming problem is the problem of either minimizing or maximizing

a linear function subject to a finite set of linear constraints. If

minimizing, we call the linear program a minimization linear program,
and if maximizing, we call the linear program a maximization linear
program.

In order to discuss linear-programming algorithms and properties, it
will be helpful to use a standard notation for the input. By convention,

a maximization linear program takes as input n real numbers c1, c2, ... ,
cn; m real numbers b1, b2, ... , bm; and mn real numbers aij for i = 1, 2,
... , m and j = 1, 2, ... , n.
The goal is to find n real numbers x1, x2, ... , xn that

subject to

We call expression (29.11) the objective function and the n + m
inequalities in lines (29.12) and (29.13) the constraints. The n
constraints in line (29.13) are the nonnegativity constraints. It can

sometimes be more convenient to express a linear program in a more

compact form. If we create an m × n matrix A = (aij), an m-vector b =
(bi), an n-vector c = (cj), and an n-vector x = (xj), then we can rewrite

the linear program defined in (29.11)(29.13) as

subject to

In line (29.14), cTx is the inner product of two n-vectors. In inequality
(29.15), Ax is the m-vector that is the product of an m × n matrix and
an n-vector, and in inequality (29.16), x 0 means that each entry of the
vector x must be nonnegative. We call this representation the standard
form for a linear program, and we adopt the convention that A, b, and c

always have the dimensions given above.
The standard form above may not naturally correspond to real-life

situations you are trying to model. For example, you might have
equality constraints or variables that can take on negative values.
Exercises 29.1-6 and 29.1-7 ask you to show how to convert any linear
program into this standard form.

We now introduce terminology to describe solutions to linear
programs. We denote a particular setting of the values in a variable, say

x, by putting a bar over the variable name: x. If x satisfies all the
constraints, then it is a feasible solution, but if it fails to satisfy at least
one constraint, then it is an infeasible solution. We say that a solution x
has objective value cTx. A feasible solution x whose objective value is
maximum over all feasible solutions is an optimal solution, and we call

its objective value cTx the optimal objective value. If a linear program
has no feasible solutions, we say that the linear program is infeasible,
and otherwise, it is feasible. The set of points that satisfy all the
constraints is the feasible region. If a linear program has some feasible

solutions but does not have a finite optimal objective value, then the

feasible region is unbounded and so is the linear program. Exercise 29.1-

5 asks you to show that a linear program can have a finite optimal
objective value even if the feasible region is unbounded.

One of the reasons for the power and popularity of linear
programming is that linear programs can, in general, be solved
efficiently. There are two classes of algorithms, known as ellipsoid
algorithms and interior-point algorithms, that solve linear programs in
polynomial time. In addition, the simplex algorithm is widely used.
Although it does not run in polynomial time in the worst case, it tends
to perform well in practice.

We will not give a detailed algorithm for linear programming, but
will discuss a few important ideas. First, we will give an example of
using a geometric procedure to solve a two-variable linear program.
Although this example does not immediately generalize to an efficient
algorithm for larger problems, it introduces some important concepts
for linear programming and for optimization in general.

A two-variable linear program

Let us first consider the following linear program with two variables:

subject to

Figure 29.2(a) graphs the constraints in the (x1, x2)-Cartesian

coordinate system. The feasible region in the two-dimensional space
(highlighted in blue in the figure) is convex.1 Conceptually, you could

evaluate the objective function x1 + x2 at each point in the feasible

region, and then identify a point that has the maximum objective value

as an optimal solution. For this example (and for most linear

programs), however, the feasible region contains an infinite number of

points, and so to solve this linear program, you need an efficient way to

find a point that achieves the maximum objective value without

explicitly evaluating the objective function at every point in the feasible

region.

In two dimensions, you can optimize via a graphical procedure. The

set of points for which x1 + x2 = z, for any z, is a line with a slope of
-1. Plotting x1 + x2 = 0 produces the line with slope -1 through the

origin, as in Figure 29.2(b). The intersection of this line and the feasible

region is the set of feasible solutions that have an objective value of 0.

In this case, that intersection of the line with the feasible region is the

single point (0, 0). More generally, for any value z, the intersection of
the line x1 + x2 = z and the feasible region is the set of feasible
solutions that have objective value z. Figure 29.2(b) shows the lines x1
+ x2 = 0, x1 + x2 = 4, and x1 + x2 = 8. Because the feasible region in
Figure 29.2 is bounded, there must be some maximum value z for which
the intersection of the line x1 + x2 = z and the feasible region is
nonempty. Any point in the feasible region that maximizes x1 + x2 is an

optimal solution to the linear program, which in this case is the vertex

of the feasible region at x1 = 2 and x2 = 6, with objective value 8.

Figure 29.2 (a) The linear program given in (29.18)(29.21). Each constraint is represented by
a line and a direction. The intersection of the constraints, which is the feasible region, is
highlighted in blue. (b) The red lines show, respectively, the points for which the objective

value is 0, 4, and 8. The optimal solution to the linear program is x1 = 2 and x2 = 6 with

objective value 8.

It is no accident that an optimal solution to the linear program

occurs at a vertex of the feasible region. The maximum value of z for
which the line x1 + x2 = z intersects the feasible region must be on the

boundary of the feasible region, and thus the intersection of this line
with the boundary of the feasible region is either a single vertex or a
line segment. If the intersection is a single vertex, then there is just one
optimal solution, and it is that vertex. If the intersection is a line
segment, every point on that line segment must have the same objective
value. In particular, both endpoints of the line segment are optimal
solutions. Since each endpoint of a line segment is a vertex, there is an
optimal solution at a vertex in this case as well.

Although you cannot easily graph linear programs with more than
two variables, the same intuition holds. If you have three variables, then
each constraint corresponds to a half-space in three-dimensional space.
The intersection of these half-spaces forms the feasible region. The set

of points for which the objective function obtains a given value z is now

a plane (assuming no degenerate conditions). If all coefficients of the
objective function are nonnegative, and if the origin is a feasible
solution to the linear program, then as you move this plane away from

the origin, in a direction normal to the objective function, you find
points of increasing objective value. (If the origin is not feasible or if
some coefficients in the objective function are negative, the intuitive
picture becomes slightly more complicated.) As in two dimensions,
because the feasible region is convex, the set of points that achieve the
optimal objective value must include a vertex of the feasible region.

Similarly, if you have n variables, each constraint defines a half-space in
n-dimensional space. We call the feasible region formed by the
intersection of these half-spaces a simplex. The objective function is

now a hyperplane and, because of convexity, an optimal solution still
occurs at a vertex of the simplex. Any algorithm for linear programming
must also identify linear programs that have no solutions, as well as
linear programs that have no finite optimal solution.

The simplex algorithm takes as input a linear program and returns an

optimal solution. It starts at some vertex of the simplex and performs a
sequence of iterations. In each iteration, it moves along an edge of the
simplex from a current vertex to a neighboring vertex whose objective
value is no smaller than that of the current vertex (and usually is
larger.) The simplex algorithm terminates when it reaches a local
maximum, which is a vertex from which all neighboring vertices have a
smaller objective value. Because the feasible region is convex and the
objective function is linear, this local optimum is actually a global
optimum. In Section 29.3, we'll see an important concept called
"duality," which we'll use to prove that the solution returned by the
simplex algorithm is indeed optimal.

The simplex algorithm, when implemented carefully, often solves
general linear programs quickly in practice. With some carefully
contrived inputs, however, the simplex algorithm can require
exponential time. The first polynomial-time algorithm for linear

programming was the ellipsoid algorithm, which runs slowly in practice.
A second class of polynomial-time algorithms are known as interiorpoint methods. In contrast to the simplex algorithm, which moves along

the exterior of the feasible region and maintains a feasible solution that
is a vertex of the simplex at each iteration, these algorithms move
through the interior of the feasible region. The intermediate solutions,

while feasible, are not necessarily vertices of the simplex, but the final
solution is a vertex. For large inputs, interior-point algorithms can run
as fast as, and sometimes faster than, the simplex algorithm. The
chapter notes point you to more information about these algorithms.

If you add to a linear program the additional requirement that all

variables take on integer values, you have an integer linear program.

Exercise 34.5-3 on page 1098 asks you to show that just finding a
feasible solution to this problem is NP-hard. Since no polynomial-time
algorithms are known for any NP-hard problems, there is no known
polynomial-time algorithm for integer linear programming. In contrast,
a general linear-programming problem can be solved in polynomial
time.

Exercises

29.1-1

Consider the linear program

minimize -2x1 + 3x2

subject to

x1 + x2 = 7
x1 - 2x2 4

x1 0.

Give three feasible solutions to this linear program. What is the
objective value of each one?

29.1-2

Consider the following linear program, which has a nonpositivity
constraint:

minimize 2x1 + 7x2 + x3

subject to

x1 - x3 = 7

3x1 + x2 24

x2 0
x3 0.

Give three feasible solutions to this linear program. What is the
objective value of each one?

29.1-3

Show that the following linear program is infeasible:

maximize 3x1 - 2x2

subject to

x1 + x2 2
-2x1 - 2x2 -10

x1, x2 0.

29.1-4

Show that the following linear program is unbounded:

maximize x1 - x2

subject to

-2x1 + x2 -1
-x1 - 2x2 -2

x1, x2 0.

29.1-5

Give an example of a linear program for which the feasible region is not
bounded, but the optimal objective value is finite.

29.1-6

Sometimes, in a linear program, you need to convert constraints from
one form to another.

a. Show how to convert an equality constraint into an equivalent set of

inequalities. That is, given a constraint , give a set of

inequalities that will be satisfied if and only if ,

b. Show how to convert an inequality constraint into an

equality constraint and a nonnegativity constraint. You will need to

introduce an additional variable s, and use the constraint that s 0.

29.1-7

Explain how to convert a minimization linear program to an equivalent
maximization linear program, and argue that your new linear program is
equivalent to the original one.

29.1-8

In the political problem at the beginning of this chapter, there are
feasible solutions that correspond to winning more voters than there

actually are in the district. For example, you can set x2 to 200, x3 to
200, and x1 = x4 = 0. That solution is feasible, yet it seems to say that

you will win 400,000 suburban voters, even though there are only
200,000 actual suburban voters. What constraints can you add to the
linear program to ensure that you never seem to win more voters than
there actually are? Even if you don't add these constraints, argue that
the optimal solution to this linear program can never win more voters
than there actually are in the district.