29.2 Formulating problems as linear programs

Linear programming has many applications. Any textbook on
operations research is filled with examples of linear programming, and
linear programming has become a standard tool taught to students in
most business schools. The election scenario is one typical example.
Here are two more examples:

An airline wishes to schedule its flight crews. The Federal Aviation
Administration imposes several constraints, such as limiting the
number of consecutive hours that each crew member can work

and insisting that a particular crew work only on one model of
aircraft during each month. The airline wants to schedule crews
on all of its flights using as few crew members as possible.

An oil company wants to decide where to drill for oil. Siting a drill
at a particular location has an associated cost and, based on
geological surveys, an expected payoff of some number of barrels
of oil. The company has a limited budget for locating new drills
and wants to maximize the amount of oil it expects to find, given
this budget.

Linear programs also model and solve graph and combinatorial
problems, such as those appearing in this book. We have already seen a
special case of linear programming used to solve systems of difference
constraints in Section 22.4. In this section, we'll study how to formulate
several graph and network-flow problems as linear programs. Section
35.4 uses linear programming as a tool to find an approximate solution
to another graph problem.

Perhaps the most important aspect of linear programming is to be
able to recognize when you can formulate a problem as a linear
program. Once you cast a problem as a polynomial-sized linear
program, you can solve it in polynomial time by the ellipsoid algorithm
or interior-point methods. Several linear-programming software
packages can solve problems efficiently, so that once the problem is in
the form of a linear program, such a package can solve it.

We'll look at several concrete examples of linear-programming
problems. We start with two problems that we have already studied: the
single-source shortest-paths problem from Chapter 22 and the
maximum-flow problem from Chapter 24. We then describe the
minimum-cost-flow problem. (Although the minimum-cost-flow
problem has a polynomial-time algorithm that is not based on linear
programming, we won't describe the algorithm.) Finally, we describe the
multicommodity-flow problem, for which the only known polynomialtime algorithm is based on linear programming.

When we solved graph problems in Part VI, we used attribute

notation, such as v.d and (u, v).f. Linear programs typically use

subscripted variables rather than objects with attached attributes,

however. Therefore, when we express variables in linear programs, we
indicate vertices and edges through subscripts. For example, we denote

the shortest-path weight for vertex v not by v.d but by dv, and we
denote the flow from vertex u to vertex v not by (u, v).f but by fuv. For

quantities that are given as inputs to problems, such as edge weights or

capacities, we continue to use notations such as w(u, v) and c(u, v).

Shortest paths

We can formulate the single-source shortest-paths problem as a linear
program. We'll focus on how to formulate the single-pair shortest-path
problem, leaving the extension to the more general single-source
shortest-paths problem as Exercise 29.2-2.

In the single-pair shortest-path problem, the input is a weighted,

directed graph G = (V, E), with weight function w : E mapping
edges to real-valued weights, a source vertex s, and destination vertex t.
The goal is to compute the value dt, which is the weight of a shortest
path from s to t. To express this problem as a linear program, you need

to determine a set of variables and constraints that define when you

have a shortest path from s to t. The triangle inequality (Lemma 22.10
on page 633) gives dv du + w(u, v) for each edge (u, v) E. The source
vertex initially receives a value ds = 0, which never changes. Thus the
following linear program expresses the shortest-path weight from s to t:

subject to

You might be surprised that this linear program maximizes an objective
function when it is supposed to compute shortest paths. Minimizing the
objective function would be a mistake, because when all the edge

weights are nonnegative, setting dv = 0 for all v V (recall that a bar

over a variable name denotes a specific setting of the variable's value)
would yield an optimal solution to the linear program without solving

the shortest-paths problem. Maximizing is the right thing to do because

an optimal solution to the shortest-paths problem sets each dv to min
{du + w(u, v) : u V and (u, v) E}, so that dv is the largest value that is
less than or equal to all of the values in the set {du + w(u, v). Therefore,
it makes sense to maximize dv for all vertices v on a shortest path from s
to t subject to these constraints, and maximizing dt achieves this goal.

This linear program has |V| variables dv, one for each vertex v V. It
also has |E| + 1 constraints: one for each edge, plus the additional

constraint that the source vertex's shortest-path weight always has the
value 0.

Maximum flow

Next, let's express the maximum-flow problem as a linear program.

Recall that the input is a directed graph G = (V, E) in which each edge
(u, v) E has a nonnegative capacity c(u, v) 0, and two distinguished
vertices: a source s and a sink t. As defined in Section 24.1, a flow is a
nonnegative real-valued function f : V × V that satisfies the

capacity constraint and flow conservation. A maximum flow is a flow
that satisfies these constraints and maximizes the flow value, which is
the total flow coming out of the source minus the total flow into the
source. A flow, therefore, satisfies linear constraints, and the value of a

flow is a linear function. Recalling also that we assume that c(u, v) = 0 if
(u, v) E and that there are no antiparallel edges, the maximum-flow

problem can be expressed as a linear program:

subject to

This linear program has |V|2 variables, corresponding to the flow
between each pair of vertices, and it has 2 |V|2 + |V| - 2 constraints.

It is usually more efficient to solve a smaller-sized linear program.
The linear program in (29.25)(29.28) has, for ease of notation, a flow

and capacity of 0 for each pair of vertices u, v with (u, v) E. It is more
efficient to rewrite the linear program so that it has O(V + E)

constraints. Exercise 29.2-4 asks you to do so.

Minimum-cost flow

In this section, we have used linear programming to solve problems for
which we already knew efficient algorithms. In fact, an efficient
algorithm designed specifically for a problem, such as Dijkstra's
algorithm for the single-source shortest-paths problem, will often be
more efficient than linear programming, both in theory and in practice.

The real power of linear programming comes from the ability to
solve new problems. Recall the problem faced by the politician in the
beginning of this chapter. The problem of obtaining a sufficient number
of votes, while not spending too much money, is not solved by any of
the algorithms that we have studied in this book, yet it can be solved by
linear programming. Books abound with such real-world problems that
linear programming can solve. Linear programming is also particularly
useful for solving variants of problems for which we may not already
know of an efficient algorithm.

Figure 29.3 (a) An example of a minimum-cost-flow problem. Capacities are denoted by c and
costs by a. Vertex s is the source, and vertex t is the sink. The goal is to send 4 units of flow
from s to t. (b) A solution to the minimum-cost flow problem in which 4 units of flow are sent
from s to t. For each edge, the flow and capacity are written as flow/capacity.

Consider, for example, the following generalization of the maximum-

flow problem. Suppose that, in addition to a capacity c(u, v) for each
edge (u, v), you are given a real-valued cost a(u, v). As in the maximumflow problem, assume that c(u, v) = 0 if (u, v) E and that there are no

antiparallel edges. If you send fuv units of flow over edge (u, v), you
incur a cost of a(u, v) · fuv. You are also given a flow demand d. You
wish to send d units of flow from s to t while minimizing the total cost
(u,v)E a(u, v) · fuv incurred by the flow. This problem is known as the
minimum-cost-flow problem.

Figure 29.3(a) shows an example of the minimum-cost-flow problem,

with a goal of sending 4 units of flow from s to t while incurring the
minimum total cost. Any particular legal flow, that is, a function f

satisfying constraints (29.26)(29.28), incurs a total cost of

(u,v)E a(u, v) · fuv. What is the particular 4-unit flow that minimizes

this cost? Figure 29.3(b) shows an optimal solution, with total cost

(u,v)E a(u, v) · fuv = (2 · 2) + (5 · 2) + (3 · 1) + (7 · 1) + (1 · 3) = 27.

There are polynomial-time algorithms specifically designed for the
minimum-cost-flow problem, but they are beyond the scope of this
book. The minimum-cost-flow problem can be expressed as a linear
program, however. The linear program looks similar to the one for the
maximum-flow problem with the additional constraint that the value of

the flow must be exactly d units, and with the new objective function of

minimizing the cost:

subject to

Multicommodity flow

As a final example, let's consider another flow problem. Suppose that
the Lucky Puck company from Section 24.1 decides to diversify its
product line and ship not only hockey pucks, but also hockey sticks and
hockey helmets. Each piece of equipment is manufactured in its own

factory, has its own warehouse, and must be shipped, each day, from

factory to warehouse. The sticks are manufactured in Vancouver and

are needed in Saskatoon, and the helmets are manufactured in

Edmonton and must be shipped to Regina. The capacity of the shipping

network does not change, however, and the different items, or

commodities, must share the same network.

This example is an instance of a multicommodity-flow problem. The

input to this problem is once again a directed graph G = (V, E) in which

each edge (u, v) E has a nonnegative capacity c(u, v) 0. As in the

maximum-flow problem, implicitly assume that c(u, v) = 0 for (u, v) E

and that the graph has no antiparallel edges. In addition, there are k

different commodities, K1, K2, ... , Kk, with commodity i specified by

the triple Ki = (si, ti, di). Here, vertex si is the source of commodity i,

vertex ti is the sink of commodity i, and di is the demand for commodity

i, which is the desired flow value for the commodity from si to ti. We

define a flow for commodity i, denoted by fi, (so that fiuv is the flow of

commodity i from vertex u to vertex v) to be a real-valued function that

satisfies the flow-conservation and capacity constraints. We define fuv,

the aggregate flow, to be the sum of the various commodity flows, so

that . The aggregate flow on edge (u, v) must be no more

than the capacity of edge (u, v). This problem has no objective function:

the question is to determine whether such a flow exists. Thus the linear

program for this problem has a "null" objective function:

The only known polynomial-time algorithm for this problem expresses
it as a linear program and then solves it with a polynomial-time linear-

programming algorithm.

Exercises

29.2-1

Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the

shortest path from vertex s to vertex x in Figure 22.2(a) on page 609.

29.2-2
Given a graph G, write a linear program for the single-source shortestpaths problem. The solution should have the property that dv is the
shortest-path weight from the source vertex s to v for each vertex v V.

29.2-3

Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the
maximum flow in Figure 24.1(a).

29.2-4

Rewrite the linear program for maximum flow (29.25)(29.28) so that it

uses only O(V + E) constraints.

29.2-5
Write a linear program that, given a bipartite graph G = (V, E), solves

the maximum-bipartite-matching problem.

29.2-6

There can be more than one way to model a particular problem as a
linear program. This exercise gives an alternative formulation for the

maximum-flow problem. Let P = {P1, P2, ... , Pp} be the set of all
possible directed simple paths from source s to sink t. Using decision
variables x1, ... , xp, where xi is the amount of flow on path i, formulate

a linear program for the maximum-flow problem. What is an upper

bound on p, the number of directed simple paths from s to t?

29.2-7
In the minimum-cost multicommodity-flow problem, the input is a
directed graph G = (V, E) in which each edge (u, v) E has a

nonnegative capacity c(u, v) 0 and a cost a(u, v). As in the
multicommodity-flow problem, there are k different commodities, K1,
K2, ... , Kk, with commodity i specified by the triple Ki = (si, ti, di). We
define the flow fi for commodity i and the aggregate flow fuv on edge (u,
v) as in the multicommodity-flow problem. A feasible flow is one in
which the aggregate flow on each edge (u, v) is no more than the
capacity of edge (u, v). The cost of a flow is u,vE a(u, v) · fuv, and the

goal is to find the feasible flow of minimum cost. Express this problem
as a linear program.