29.3 Duality

We will now introduce a powerful concept called linear-programming
duality. In general, given a maximization problem, duality allows you to

formulate a related minimization problem that has the same objective
value. The idea of duality is actually more general than linear
programming, but we restrict our attention to linear programming in
this section.

Duality enables us to prove that a solution is indeed optimal. We saw
an example of duality in Chapter 24 with Theorem 24.6, the max-flow
min-cut theorem. Suppose that, given an instance of a maximum-flow

problem, you find a flow f with value |f|. How do you know whether f is a

maximum flow? By the max-flow min-cut theorem, if you can find a cut

whose value is also |f|, then you have verified that f is indeed a maximum

flow. This relationship provides an example of duality: given a
maximization problem, define a related minimization problem such that
the two problems have the same optimal objective values.

Given a linear program in standard form in which the objective is to

maximize, let's see how to formulate a dual linear program in which the

objective is to minimize and whose optimal value is identical to that of
the original linear program. When referring to dual linear programs, we

call the original linear program the primal.

Given the primal linear program

subject to

its dual is

subject to

Mechanically, to form the dual, change the maximization to a
minimization, exchange the roles of coefficients on the right-hand sides

and in the objective function, and replace each by . Each of the m
constraints in the primal corresponds to a variable yi in the dual.
Likewise, each of the n constraints in the dual corresponds to a variable
xj in the primal. For example, consider the following primal linear

program:

subject to

Its dual is

subject to

Although forming the dual can be considered a mechanical
operation, there is an intuitive explanation. Consider the primal
maximization problem (29.37)(29.41). Each constraint gives an upper
bound on the objective function. In addition, if you take one or more
constraints and add together nonnegative multiples of them, you get a
valid constraint. For example, you can add constraints (29.38) and

(29.39) to obtain the constraint 3x1 + 3x2 + 8x3 54. Any feasible

solution to the primal must satisfy this new constraint, but there is
something else interesting about it. Comparing this new constraint to
the objective function (29.37), you can see that for each variable, the
corresponding coefficient is at least as large as the coefficient in the

objective function. Thus, since the variables x1, x2 and x3 are

nonnegative, we have that

3x1 + x2 + 4x3 3x1 + 3x2 + 8x3 54,

and so the solution value to the primal is at most 54. In other words,
adding these two constraints together has generated an upper bound on
the objective value.

In general, for any nonnegative multipliers y1, y2, and y3, you can

generate a constraint

y1(x1+x2+3x3)+y2(2x1+2x2+5x3)+y3(4x1+x2+2x3)

30y1+24y2+36y3

from the primal constraints or, by distributing and regrouping,

(y1+2y2+4y3)x1+(y1+2y2+y3)x2+(3y1+5y2+2y3)x3

30y1+24y2+36y3.

Now, as long as this constraint has coefficients of x1, x2, and x3 that

are at least their objective-function coefficients, it is a valid upper
bound. That is, as long as

y1 + 2y2 + 4y3 3,
y1 + 2y2 + y3 1,
3y1 + 5y2 + 2y3 4,
you have a valid upper bound of 30y1+24y2+36y3. The multipliers y1,
y2, and y3 must be nonnegative, because otherwise you cannot combine

the inequalities. Of course, you would like the upper bound to be as

small as possible, and so you want to choose y to minimize 30y1 + 24y2
+ 36y3. Observe that we have just described the dual linear program as

the problem of finding the smallest possible upper bound on the primal.
We'll formalize this idea and show in Theorem 29.4 that, if the linear

program and its dual are feasible and bounded, then the optimal value
of the dual linear program is always equal to the optimal value of the

primal linear program. We begin by demonstrating weak duality, which

states that any feasible solution to the primal linear program has a value
no greater than that of any feasible solution to the dual linear program.

Lemma 29.1 (Weak linear-programming duality)
Let x be any feasible solution to the primal linear program in (29.31)

(29.33), and let be any feasible solution to its dual linear program in
(29.34)(29.36). Then

Proof We have

Corollary 29.2

Let x be a feasible solution to the primal linear program in (29.31)

(29.33), and let be a feasible solution to its dual linear program in
(29.34)(29.36). If

then x and are optimal solutions to the primal and dual linear

programs, respectively.

Proof By Lemma 29.1, the objective value of a feasible solution to the

primal cannot exceed that of a feasible solution to the dual. The primal
linear program is a maximization problem and the dual is a

minimization problem. Thus, if feasible solutions x and have the same

objective value, neither can be improved.

We now show that, at optimality, the primal and dual objective
values are indeed equal. To prove linear programming duality, we will
require one lemma from linear algebra, known as Farkas's lemma, the
proof of which Problem 29-4 asks you to provide. Farkas's lemma can
take several forms, each of which is about when a set of linear equalities

has a solution. In stating the lemma, we use m + 1 as a dimension

because it matches our use below.

Lemma 29.3 (Farkas's lemma)
Given M (m+1)×n and g m+1, exactly one of the following

statements is true:

1. There exists v n such that Mv g,
2. There exists w m+1 such that w 0, wTM = 0 (an n-vector of

all zeros), and wTg < 0.

Theorem 29.4 (Linear-programming duality)

Given the primal linear program in (29.31)(29.33) and its
corresponding dual in (29.34)(29.36), if both are feasible and bounded,

then for optimal solutions x* and y*, we have cTx* = bTy*.

Proof Let = bTy* be the optimal value of the dual linear program

given in (29.34)(29.36). Consider an augmented set of primal
constraints in which we add a constraint to (29.31)(29.33) that the

objective value is at least . We write out this augmented primal as

We can multiply (29.48) through by -1 and rewrite (29.47)(29.48) as

Here, denotes an (m+1)×n matrix, x is an n-vector, and

denotes an (m + 1)-vector.

We claim that if there is a feasible solution x to the augmented

primal, then the theorem is proved. To establish this claim, observe that

x is also a feasible solution to the original primal and that it has

objective value at least . We can then apply Lemma 29.1, which states

that the objective value of the primal is at most , to complete the proof

of the theorem.

It therefore remains to show that the augmented primal has a

feasible solution. Suppose, for the purpose of contradiction, that the

augmented primal is infeasible, which means that there is no v n

such that . We can apply Farkas's lemma, Lemma 29.3, to

inequalty (29.49) with

Because the augmented primal is infeasible, condition 1 of Farkas's

lemma does not hold. Therefore, condition 2 must apply, so that there

must exist a w m+1 such that w 0, wTM = 0, and wTg < 0. Let's

write w as for some m and , where 0 and 0.

Substituting for w, M, and g in condition 2 gives

Unpacking the matrix notation gives

We now show that the requirements in (29.50) contradict the

assumption that is the optimal solution value for the dual linear

program. We consider two cases.

The first case is when = 0. In this case, (29.50) simplifies to

We'll now construct a dual feasible solution y with an objective value
smaller than bTy*. Set y = y* + , for any > 0. Since

yTA = (y* + )TA

= y*TA + TA

= y*TA (by (29.51))

cT (because y* is feasible),

y is feasible. Now consider the objective value

bTy = bT(y* + )
= bTy* + bT
< bTy*,

where the last inequality follows because > 0 and, by (29.51), Tb =
bT < 0 (since both Tb and bT are the inner product of b and ), and

so their product is negative. Thus we have a feasible dual solution of

value less than , which contradicts being the optimal objective value.

We now consider the second case, where > 0. In this case, we can
take (29.50) and divide through by to obtain

Now set y = / in (29.52), giving
yTA = cT and yTb < .
Thus, y is a feasible dual solution with objective value strictly less than
, a contradiction. We conclude that the augmented primal has a

feasible solution, and the theorem is proved.

Fundamental theorem of linear programming

We conclude this chapter by stating the fundamental theorem of linear
programming, which extends Theorem 29.4 to the cases when the linear
program may be either feasible or unbounded. Exercise 29.3-8 asks you
to provide the proof.

Theorem 29.5 (Fundamental theorem of linear programming)

Any linear program, given in standard form, either

1. has an optimal solution with a finite objective value,
2. is infeasible, or
3. is unbounded.

Exercises

29.3-1

Formulate the dual of the linear program given in lines (29.6)(29.10)
on page 852.

29.3-2

You have a linear program that is not in standard form. You could
produce the dual by first converting it to standard form, and then

taking the dual. It would be more convenient, however, to produce the
dual directly. Explain how to directly take the dual of an arbitrary linear
program.

29.3-3

Write down the dual of the maximum-flow linear program, as given in
lines (29.25)(29.28) on page 862. Explain how to interpret this
formulation as a minimum-cut problem.

29.3-4

Write down the dual of the minimum-cost-flow linear program, as given
in lines (29.29)(29.30) on page 864. Explain how to interpret this
problem in terms of graphs and flows.

29.3-5

Show that the dual of the dual of a linear program is the primal linear
program.

29.3-6

Which result from Chapter 24 can be interpreted as weak duality for
the maximum-flow problem?

29.3-7

Consider the following 1-variable primal linear program:

maximize tx

subject to

rx s
x 0,

where r, s, and t are arbitrary real numbers. State for which values of r,
s, and t you can assert that

1. Both the primal linear program and its dual have optimal
solutions with finite objective values.

2. The primal is feasible, but the dual is infeasible.

3. The dual is feasible, but the primal is infeasible.

4. Neither the primal nor the dual is feasible.

29.3-8

Prove the fundamental theorem of linear programming, Theorem 29.5.

Problems

29-1 Linear-inequality feasibility
Given a set of m linear inequalities on n variables x1, x2, ... , xn, the
linear-inequality feasibility problem asks whether there is a setting of the

variables that simultaneously satisfies each of the inequalities.

a. Given an algorithm for the linear-programming problem, show how

to use it to solve a linear-inequality feasibility problem. The number
of variables and constraints that you use in the linear-programming

problem should be polynomial in n and m.
b. Given an algorithm for the linear-inequality feasibility problem, show

how to use it to solve a linear-programming problem. The number of
variables and linear inequalities that you use in the linear-inequality

feasibility problem should be polynomial in n and m, the number of

variables and constraints in the linear program.

29-2 Complementary slackness
Complementary slackness describes a relationship between the values of

primal variables and dual constraints and between the values of dual

variables and primal constraints. Let x be a feasible solution to the

primal linear program given in (29.31)(29.33), and let be a feasible
solution to the dual linear program given in (29.34)(29.36).
Complementary slackness states that the following conditions are

necessary and sufficient for x and to be optimal:

and

a. Verify that complementary slackness holds for the linear program in

lines (29.37)(29.41).

b. Prove that complementary slackness holds for any primal linear

program and its corresponding dual.

c. Prove that a feasible solution x to a primal linear program given in

lines (29.31)(29.33) is optimal if and only if there exist values =

(1, 2, ... , m) such that

1. is a feasible solution to the dual linear program given in
(29.34)(29.36),

2. for all j such that xj > 0, and

3. i = 0 for all i such that .

29-3 Integer linear programming
An integer linear-programming problem is a linear-programming
problem with the additional constraint that the variables x must take on

integer values. Exercise 34.5-3 on page 1098 shows that just determining
whether an integer linear program has a feasible solution is NP-hard,
which means that there is no known polynomial-time algorithm for this
problem.

a. Show that weak duality (Lemma 29.1) holds for an integer linear

program.

b. Show that duality (Theorem 29.4) does not always hold for an integer

linear program.

c. Given a primal linear program in standard form, let P be the optimal
objective value for the primal linear program, D be the optimal
objective value for its dual, IP be the optimal objective value for the

integer version of the primal (that is, the primal with the added

constraint that the variables take on integer values), and ID be the

optimal objective value for the integer version of the dual. Assuming
that both the primal integer program and the dual integer program
are feasible and bounded, show that

IP P = D ID.

29-4 Farkas's lemma

Prove Farkas's lemma, Lemma 29.3.

29-5 Minimum-cost circulation

This problem considers a variant of the minimum-cost-flow problem
from Section 29.2 in which there is no demand, source, or sink. Instead,

the input, as before, contains a flow network, capacity constraints c(u,
v), and edge costs a(u, v). A flow is feasible if it satisfies the capacity
constraint on every edge and flow conservation at every vertex. The

goal is to find, among all feasible flows, the one of minimum cost. We

call this problem the minimum-cost-circulation problem.

a. Formulate the minimum-cost-circulation problem as a linear

program.

b. Suppose that for all edges (u, v) E, we have a(u, v) > 0. What does

an optimal solution to the minimum-cost-circulation problem look
like?

c. Formulate the maximum-flow problem as a minimum-cost-circulation

problem linear program. That is, given a maximum-flow problem

instance G = (V, E) with source s, sink t and edge capacities c, create

a minimum-cost-circulation problem by giving a (possibly different)

network G = (V, E) with edge capacities c and edge costs a such

that you can derive a solution to the maximum-flow problem from a
solution to the minimum-cost-circulation problem.

d. Formulate the single-source shortest-path problem as a minimum-

cost-circulation problem linear program.

Chapter notes

This chapter only begins to study the wide field of linear programming.
A number of books are devoted exclusively to linear programming,
including those by Chvátal [94], Gass [178], Karloff [246], Schrijver
[398], and Vanderbei [444]. Many other books give a good coverage of
linear programming, including those by Papadimitriou and Steiglitz
[353] and Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin [7]. The coverage in this chapter
draws on the approach taken by Chvátal.

The simplex algorithm for linear programming was invented by G.
Dantzig in 1947. Shortly after, researchers discovered how to formulate
a number of problems in a variety of fields as linear programs and solve
them with the simplex algorithm. As a result, applications of linear
programming flourished, along with several algorithms. Variants of the
simplex algorithm remain the most popular methods for solving linearprogramming problems. This history appears in a number of places,
including the notes in [94] and [246].

The ellipsoid algorithm was the first polynomial-time algorithm for
linear programming and is due to L. G. Khachian in 1979. It was based
on earlier work by N. Z. Shor, D. B. Judin, and A. S. Nemirovskii.
Grötschel, Lovász, and Schrijver [201] describe how to use the ellipsoid
algorithm to solve a variety of problems in combinatorial optimization.
To date, the ellipsoid algorithm does not appear to be competitive with
the simplex algorithm in practice.

Karmarkar's paper [247] includes a description of the first interiorpoint algorithm. Many subsequent researchers designed interior-point
algorithms. Good surveys appear in the article of Goldfarb and Todd
[189] and the book by Ye [463].

Analysis of the simplex algorithm remains an active area of research.
V. Klee and G. J. Minty constructed an example on which the simplex

algorithm runs through 2n - 1 iterations. The simplex algorithm usually

performs well in practice, and many researchers have tried to give
theoretical justification for this empirical observation. A line of research
begun by K. H. Borgwardt, and carried on by many others, shows that
under certain probabilistic assumptions on the input, the simplex
algorithm converges in expected polynomial time. Spielman and Teng

[421] made progress in this area, introducing the "smoothed analysis of
algorithms" and applying it to the simplex algorithm.

The simplex algorithm is known to run efficiently in certain special
cases. Particularly noteworthy is the network-simplex algorithm, which
is the simplex algorithm, specialized to network-flow problems. For
certain network problems, including the shortest-paths, maximum-flow,
and minimum-cost-flow problems, variants of the network-simplex
algorithm run in polynomial time. See, for example, the article by Orlin
[349] and the citations therein.

1 An intuitive definition of a convex region is that it fulfills the requirement that for any two
points in the region, all points on a line segment between them are also in the region.

30 Polynomials and the FFT

The straightforward method of adding two polynomials of degree n
takes (n) time, but the straightforward method of multiplying them
takes (n2) time. This chapter will show how the fast Fourier transform,
or FFT, can reduce the time to multiply polynomials to (n lg n).

The most common use for Fourier transforms, and hence the FFT, is

in signal processing. A signal is given in the time domain: as a function

mapping time to amplitude. Fourier analysis expresses the signal as a
weighted sum of phase-shifted sinusoids of varying frequencies. The
weights and phases associated with the frequencies characterize the

signal in the frequency domain. Among the many everyday applications

of FFT's are compression techniques used to encode digital video and
audio information, including MP3 files. Many fine books delve into the
rich area of signal processing, and the chapter notes reference a few of
them.

Polynomials

A polynomial in the variable x over an algebraic field F represents a
function A(x) as a formal sum:

The values a0, a1, ... , an-1 are the coefficients of the polynomial. The
coefficients and x are drawn from a field F, typically the set of
complex numbers. A polynomial A(x) has degree k if its highest nonzero

coefficient is ak, in which case we say that degree(A) = k. Any integer
strictly greater than the degree of a polynomial is a degree-bound of

that polynomial. Therefore, the degree of a polynomial of degree-bound

n may be any integer between 0 and n - 1, inclusive.
A variety of operations extend to polynomials. For polynomial

addition, if A(x) and B(x) are polynomials of degree-bound n, their sum
is a polynomial C(x), also of degree-bound n, such that C(x) =
A(x)+B(x) for all x in the underlying field. That is, if

then

where cj = aj + bj for j = 0, 1, ... , n - 1. For example, given the
polynomials A(x) = 6x3 + 7x2 - 10x + 9 and B(x) = -2x3 + 4x - 5,
their sum is C(x) = 4x3 + 7x2 - 6x + 4.

For polynomial multiplication, if A(x) and B(x) are polynomials of
degree-bound n, their product C(x) is a polynomial of degree-bound 2n
- 1 such that C(x) = A(x)B(x) for all x in the underlying field. You

probably have multiplied polynomials before, by multiplying each term

in A(x) by each term in B(x) and then combining terms with equal
powers. For example, you can multiply A(x) = 6x3 + 7x2 - 10x + 9 and
B(x) = -2x3 + 4x - 5 as follows:

Another way to express the product C(x) is

where

(By the definition of degree, ak = 0 for all k > degree(A) and bk = 0 for
all k > degree(B).) If A is a polynomial of degree-bound na and B is a
polynomial of degree-bound nb, then C must be a polynomial of
degree-bound na + nb - 1, because degree(C) = degree(A) + degree(B).
Since a polynomial of degree-bound k is also a polynomial of degreebound k + 1, we normally make the somewhat simpler statement that
the product polynomial C is a polynomial of degree-bound na + nb.

Chapter outline

Section 30.1 presents two ways to represent polynomials: the coefficient
representation and the point-value representation. The straightforward

method for multiplying polynomials of degree n--equations (30.1) and
(30.2)--takes (n2) time with polynomials represented in coefficient
form, but only (n) time with point-value form. Converting between the

two representations, however, reduces the time to multiply polynomials

to just (n lg n). To see why this approach works, you must first

understand complex roots of unity, which Section 30.2 covers. Section
30.2 then uses the FFT and its inverse to perform the conversions.
Because the FFT is used so often in signal processing, it is often
implemented as a circuit in hardware, and Section 30.3 illustrates the
structure of such circuits.

This chapter relies on complex numbers, and within this chapter the

symbol i denotes exclusively.