30.1 Representing polynomials

The coefficient and point-value representations of polynomials are in a
sense equivalent: a polynomial in point-value form has a unique
counterpart in coefficient form. This section introduces the two

representations and shows how to combine them in order to multiply

two degree-bound n polynomials in (n lg n) time.

Coefficient representation

A coefficient representation of a polynomial of degree-

bound n is a vector of coefficients a = (a0, a1, ... , an-1). Matrix

equations in this chapter generally treat vectors as column vectors.

The coefficient representation is convenient for certain operations on

polynomials. For example, the operation of evaluating the polynomial

A(x) at a given point x0 consists of computing the value of A(x0). To

evaluate a polynomial in (n) time, use Horner's rule:

Similarly, adding two polynomials represented by the coefficient vectors

a = (a0, a1, ... , an-1) and b = (b0, b1, ... , bn-1) takes (n) time: just
produce the coefficient vector c = (c0, c1, ... , cn-1), where cj = aj + bj
for j = 0, 1, ... , n- 1.

Now, consider multiplying two degree-bound n polynomials A(x) and
B(x) represented in coefficient form. The method described by
equations (30.1) and (30.2) takes (n2) time, since it multiplies each
coefficient in the vector a by each coefficient in the vector b. The

operation of multiplying polynomials in coefficient form seems to be
considerably more difficult than that of evaluating a polynomial or

adding two polynomials. The resulting coefficient vector c, given by
equation (30.2), is also called the convolution of the input vectors a and
b, denoted c = a b. Since multiplying polynomials and computing

convolutions are fundamental computational problems of considerable
practical importance, this chapter concentrates on efficient algorithms
for them.

Point-value representation

A point-value representation of a polynomial A(x) of degree-bound n is
a set of n point-value pairs

{(x0, y0), (x1, y1), ... , (xn-1, yn-1)}
such that all of the xk are distinct and

for k = 0, 1, ... , n - 1. A polynomial has many different point-value
representations, since any set of n distinct points x0, x1, ... , xn-1 can

serve as a basis for the representation.
Computing a point-value representation for a polynomial given in

coefficient form is in principle straightforward, since all you have to do

is select n distinct points x0, x1, ... , xn-1 and then evaluate A(xk) for k
= 0, 1, ... , n - 1. With Horner's method, evaluating a polynomial at n
points takes (n2) time. We'll see later that if you choose the points xk
cleverly, you can accelerate this computation to run in (n lg n) time.

The inverse of evaluation--determining the coefficient form of a

polynomial from a point-value representation--is interpolation. The

following theorem shows that interpolation is well defined when the
desired interpolating polynomial must have a degree-bound equal to the
given number of point-value pairs.

Theorem 30.1 (Uniqueness of an interpolating polynomial)
For any set {(x0, y0), (x1, y1), ... , (xn-1, yn-1)} of n point-value pairs
such that all the xk values are distinct, there is a unique polynomial
A(x) of degree-bound n such that yk = A(xk) for k = 0, 1, ... , n - 1.

Proof The proof relies on the existence of the inverse of a certain

matrix. Equation (30.3) is equivalent to the matrix equation

The matrix on the left is denoted V(x0, x1, ... , xn-1) and is known
as a Vandermonde matrix. By Problem D-1 on page 1223, this matrix

has determinant

and therefore, by Theorem D.5 on page 1221, it is invertible (that is,

nonsingular) if the xk are distinct. To solve for the coefficients aj

uniquely given the point-value representation, use the inverse of the
Vandermonde matrix:

a = V(x0, x1, ... , xn-1)-1y.

The proof of Theorem 30.1 describes an algorithm for interpolation
based on solving the set (30.4) of linear equations. Section 28.1 shows

how to solve these equations in O(n3) time.
A faster algorithm for n-point interpolation is based on Lagrange's

formula:

You might want to verify that the right-hand side of equation (30.5) is a

polynomial of degree-bound n that satisfies A(xk) = yk for all k.
Exercise 30.1-5 asks you how to compute the coefficients of A using
Lagrange's formula in (n2) time.

Thus, n-point evaluation and interpolation are well-defined inverse

operations that transform between the coefficient representation of a
polynomial and a point-value representation.1 The algorithms

described above for these problems take (n2) time.

The point-value representation is quite convenient for many

operations on polynomials. For addition, if C(x) = A(x) + B(x), then
C(xk) = A(xk) + B(xk) for any point xk. More precisely, given pointvalue representations for A,
{(x0, y0), (x1, y1), ... , (xn-1, yn-1)},

and for B,

where A and B are evaluated at the same n points, then a point-value
representation for C is

Thus the time to add two polynomials of degree-bound n in point-value
form is (n).

Similarly, the point-value representation is convenient for

multiplying polynomials. If C(x) = A(x)B(x), then C(xk) = A(xk)B(xk)
for any point xk, and to obtain a point-value representation for C, just
pointwise multiply a point-value representation for A by a point-value
representation for B. Polynomial multiplication differs from polynomial
addition in one key aspect, however: degree(C) = degree(A) +
degree(B), so that if A and B have degree-bound n, then C has degreebound 2n. A standard point-value representation for A and B consists
of n point-value pairs for each polynomial. Multiplying these together
gives n point-value pairs, but 2n pairs are necessary to interpolate a
unique polynomial C of degree-bound 2n. (See Exercise 30.1-4.)
Instead, begin with "extended" point-value representations for A and
for B consisting of 2n point-value pairs each. Given an extended pointvalue representation for A,
{(x0, y0), (x1, y1), ... , (x2n-1, y2n-1)},
and a corresponding extended point-value representation for B,

then a point-value representation for C is

Given two input polynomials in extended point-value form, multiplying

them to obtain the point-value form of the result takes just (n) time,
much less than the (n2) time required to multiply polynomials in

coefficient form.

Finally, let's consider how to evaluate a polynomial given in pointvalue form at a new point. For this problem, the simplest approach
known is to first convert the polynomial to coefficient form and then
evaluate it at the new point.

Fast multiplication of polynomials in coefficient form
Can the linear-time multiplication method for polynomials in pointvalue form expedite polynomial multiplication in coefficient form? The
answer hinges on whether it is possible convert a polynomial quickly
from coefficient form to point-value form (evaluate) and vice versa
(interpolate).

Figure 30.1 A graphical outline of an efficient polynomial-multiplication process.
Representations on the top are in coefficient form, and those on the bottom are in point-value

form. The arrows from left to right correspond to the multiplication operation. The 2n terms
are complex (2n)th roots of unity.

Any points can serve as evaluation points, but certain evaluation

points allow conversion between representations in only (n lg n) time.

As we'll see in Section 30.2, if "complex roots of unity" are the
evaluation points, then the discrete Fourier transform (or DFT)
evaluates and the inverse DFT interpolates. Section 30.2 shows how the

FFT accomplishes the DFT and inverse DFT operations in (n lg n)

time.
Figure 30.1 shows this strategy graphically. One minor detail

concerns degree-bounds. The product of two polynomials of degree-

bound n is a polynomial of degree-bound 2n. Before evaluating the
input polynomials A and B, therefore, first double their degree-bounds

to 2n by adding n high-order coefficients of 0. Because the vectors have
2n elements, use "complex (2n)th roots of unity," which are denoted by
the 2n terms in Figure 30.1.

The following procedure takes advantage of the FFT to multiply two

polynomials A(x) and B(x) of degree-bound n in (n lg n)-time, where

the input and output representations are in coefficient form. The

procedure assumes that n is an exact power of 2, so if it isn't, just add

high-order zero coefficients.

1. Double degree-bound: Create coefficient representations of A(x)
and B(x) as degree-bound 2n polynomials by adding n high-

order zero coefficients to each.

2. Evaluate: Compute point-value representations of A(x) and B(x)
of length 2n by applying the FFT of order 2n on each

polynomial. These representations contain the values of the two

polynomials at the (2n)th roots of unity.

3. Pointwise multiply: Compute a point-value representation for the

polynomial C(x) = A(x)B(x) by multiplying these values

together pointwise. This representation contains the value of

C(x) at each (2n)th root of unity.

4. Interpolate: Create the coefficient representation of the

polynomial C(x) by applying the FFT on 2n point-value pairs to

compute the inverse DFT.

Steps (1) and (3) take (n) time, and steps (2) and (4) take (n lg n)

time. Thus, once we show how to use the FFT, we will have proven the
following.

Theorem 30.2
Two polynomials of degree-bound n with both the input and output
representations in coefficient form can be multiplied in (n lg n) time.

Exercises

30.1-1

Multiply the polynomials A(x) = 7x3 - x2 + x - 10 and B(x) = 8x3 -
6x + 3 using equations (30.1) and (30.2).

30.1-2
Another way to evaluate a polynomial A(x) of degree-bound n at a
given point x0 is to divide A(x) by the polynomial (x - x0), obtaining a
quotient polynomial q(x) of degree-bound n - 1 and a remainder r,

such that

A(x) = q(x)(x - x0) + r.

Then we have A(x0) = r. Show how to compute the remainder r and the
coefficients of q(x) from x0 and the coefficients of A in (n) time.

30.1-3

Given a polynomial , define . Show how

to derive a point-value representation for Arev(x) from a point-value
representation for A(x), assuming that none of the points is 0.

30.1-4
Prove that n distinct point-value pairs are necessary to uniquely specify
a polynomial of degree-bound n, that is, if fewer than n distinct point-

value pairs are given, they fail to specify a unique polynomial of degree-

bound n. (Hint: Using Theorem 30.1, what can you say about a set of n

- 1 point-value pairs to which you add one more arbitrarily chosen

point-value pair?)

30.1-5

Show how to use equation (30.5) to interpolate in (n2) time. (Hint:
First compute the coefficient representation of the polynomial j(x -
xj) and then divide by (x - xk) as necessary for the numerator of each
term (see Exercise 30.1-2). You can compute each of the n
denominators in O(n) time.)

30.1-6

Explain what is wrong with the "obvious" approach to polynomial
division using a point-value representation: dividing the corresponding

y values. Discuss separately the case in which the division comes out

exactly and the case in which it doesn't.

30.1-7
Consider two sets A and B, each having n integers in the range from 0
to 10n. The Cartesian sum of A and B is defined by

C = {x + y : x A and y B}.

The integers in C lie in the range from 0 to 20n. Show how, in O(n lg n)
time, to find the elements of C and the number of times each element of
C is realized as a sum of elements in A and B. (Hint: Represent A and B
as polynomials of degree at most 10n.)