30.3 FFT circuits

Many of the FFT's applications in signal processing require the utmost

speed, and so the FFT is often implemented as a circuit in hardware.

The FFT's divide-and-conquer structure enables the circuit to have a

parallel structure so that the depth of the circuit--the maximum

number of computational elements between any output and any input

that can reach it--is (lg n). Moreover, the structure of the FFT circuit

has several interesting mathematical properties, which we won't go into

here.

Butterfly operations

Notice that the for loop of lines 912 of the FFT procedure computes

the value twice per iteration: once in line 10 and once in line 11. A

good optimizing compiler produces code that evaluates this common

subexpression just once, storing its value into a temporary variable, so

that lines 1011 are treated like the three lines

This operation, multiplying the twiddle factor by , storing the

product into the temporary variable t, and adding and subtracting t

from , is known as a butterfly operation. Figure 30.3 shows it as a

circuit, and you can see how it vaguely resembles the shape of a

butterfly. (Although less colorfully, it could have been called a "bowtie"
operation.)

Figure 30.3 A circuit for a butterfly operation. (a) The two input values enter from the left, the
twiddle factor is multiplied by , and the sum and difference are output on the right. (b) A
simplified drawing of a butterfly operation, which we'll use when drawing the parallel FFT
circuit.

Figure 30.4 The schema for the conquer and combine steps of an n-input, n-output FFT
circuit, FFTn, shown for n = 8. Inputs enter from the left, and outputs exit from the right. The
input values first go through two FFTn/2 circuits, and then n/2 butterfly circuits combine the

results. Only the top and bottom wires entering a butterfly interact with it: wires that pass
through the middle of a butterfly do not affect that butterfly, nor are their values changed by
that butterfly.

Recursive circuit structure
The FFT procedure follows the divide-and-conquer strategy that we
first saw in Section 2.3.1:

Divide the n-element input vector into its n/2 even-indexed and n/2 odd-

indexed elements.

Conquer by recursively computing the DFTs of the two subproblems,

each of size n/2.

Combine by performing n/2 butterfly operations. These butterfly

operations work with twiddle factors , .

The circuit schema in Figure 30.4 follows the conquer and combine

steps of this pattern for an FFT circuit with n inputs and n outputs,
denoted by FFTn. Each line is a wire that carries a value. Inputs enter

from the left, one per wire, and outputs exit from the right. The

conquer step runs the inputs through two FFTn/2 circuits, which are
also constructed recursively. The values produced by the two FFTn/2
circuits feed into n/2 butterfly circuits, with twiddle factors ,

, to combine the results. The base case of the recursion

occurs when n = 1, where the sole output value equals the sole input

value. An FFT1 circuit, therefore, does nothing, and so the smallest

nontrivial FFT circuit is FFT2, a single butterfly operation whose

twiddle factor is .

Figure 30.5 The tree of input vectors to the recursive calls of the FFT procedure. The initial

invocation is for n = 8.

Permuting the inputs
How does the divide step enter into the circuit design? Let's examine
how input vectors to the various recursive calls of the FFT procedure
relate to the original input vector, so that the circuit can emulate the

divide step at the start for all levels of recursion. Figure 30.5 arranges

the input vectors to the recursive calls in an invocation of FFT in a tree

structure, where the initial call is for n = 8. The tree has one node for

each call of the procedure, labeled by the elements of the initial call as

they appear in the corresponding input vector. Each FFT invocation

makes two recursive calls, unless it has received a 1-element vector. The

first call appears in the left child, and the second call appears in the

right child.

Looking at the tree, observe that if you arrange the elements of the

initial vector a into the order in which they appear in the leaves, you can

trace the execution of the FFT procedure, but bottom up instead of top

down. First, take the elements in pairs, compute the DFT of each pair

using one butterfly operation, and replace the pair with its DFT. The

vector then holds n/2 two-element DFTs. Next, take these n/2 DFTs in

pairs and compute the DFT of the four vector elements they come from

by executing two butterfly operations, replacing two two-element DFTs

with one four-element DFT. The vector then holds n/4 four-element
DFTs. Continue in this manner until the vector holds two (n/2)-element
DFTs, which n/2 butterfly operations combine into the final n-element

DFT. In other words, you can start with the elements of the initial

vector a, but rearranged as in the leaves of Figure 30.5, and then feed

them directly into a circuit that follows the schema in Figure 30.4.

Let's think about the permutation that rearranges the input vector.

The order in which the leaves appear in Figure 30.5 is a bit-reversal
permutation. That is, letting rev(k) be the lg n-bit integer formed by
reversing the bits of the binary representation of k, then vector element
ak moves to position rev(k). In Figure 30.5, for example, the leaves

appear in the order 0, 4, 2, 6, 1, 5, 3, 7. This sequence in binary is 000,

100, 010, 110, 001, 101, 011, 111, and you can obtain it by reversing the

bits of each number in the sequence 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 or, in binary, 000,

001, 010, 011, 100, 101, 110, 111. To see in general that the input vector

should be rearranged by a bit-reversal permutation, note that at the top

level of the tree, indices whose low-order bit is 0 go into the left subtree

and indices whose low-order bit is 1 go into the right subtree. Stripping

off the low-order bit at each level, continue this process down the tree,

until you get the order given by the bit-reversal permutation at the
leaves.

The full FFT circuit

Figure 30.6 depicts the entire circuit for n = 8. The circuit begins with a

bit-reversal permutation of the inputs, followed by lg n stages, each

stage consisting of n/2 butterflies executed in parallel. Assuming that

each butterfly circuit has constant depth, the full circuit has depth (lg

n). The butterfly operations at each level of recursion in the FFT

procedure are independent, and so the circuit performs them in parallel.

The figure shows wires running from left to right, carrying values

through the lg n stages. For s = 1, 2, ... , lg n, stage s consists of n/2s

groups of butterflies, with 2s-1 butterflies per group. The twiddle

factors in stage s are , , where m = 2s.

Exercises

30.3-1

Show the values on the wires for each butterfly input and output in the
FFT circuit of Figure 30.6, given the input vector (0, 2, 3, -1, 4, 5, 7, 9).

30.3-2
Consider an FFTn circuit, such as in Figure 30.6, with wires 0, 1, ... ,
n-1 (wire j has output yj) and stages numbered as in the figure. Stage s,
for s = 1, 2 ... , lg n, consists of n/2s groups of butterflies. Which two
wires are inputs and outputs for the jth butterfly circuit in the gth
group in stage s?

30.3-3
Consider a b-bit integer k in the range 0 k < 2b. Treating k as a belement vector over {0, 1}, describe a b × b matrix M such that the
matrix-vector product Mk is the binary representation of rev(k).

Figure 30.6 A full circuit that computes the FFT in parallel, here shown for n = 8 inputs. It has
lg n stages, and each stage comprises n/2 butterflies that can operate in parallel. As in Figure

30.4, only the top and bottom wires entering a butterfly interact with it. For example, the top

butterfly in stage 2 has inputs and outputs only on wires 0 and 2 (the wires with outputs y0
and y2, respectively). This circuit has depth (lg n) and performs (n lg n) butterfly

operations altogether.

30.3-4

Write pseudocode for the procedure BIT-REVERSE-

PERMUTATION(a, n), which performs the bit-reversal permutation
on a vector a of length n in-place. Assume that you may call the
procedure BIT-REVERSE-OF(k, b), which returns an integer that is
the b-bit reversal of the nonnegative integer k, where 0 k < 2b.

30.3-5

Suppose that the adders within the butterfly operations of a given FFT
circuit sometimes fail in such a manner that they always produce a 0
output, independent of their inputs. In addition, suppose that exactly
one adder has failed, but you don't know which one. Describe how you
can identify the failed adder by supplying inputs to the overall FFT
circuit and observing the outputs. How efficient is your method?

Problems

30-1 Divide-and-conquer multiplication

a. Show how to multiply two linear polynomials ax + b and cx + d using
only three multiplications. (Hint: One of the multiplications is (a + b) ·
(c + d).)

b. Give two divide-and-conquer algorithms for multiplying two
polynomials of degree-bound n in (nlg 3) time. The first algorithm

should divide the input polynomial coefficients into a high half and a
low half, and the second algorithm should divide them according to
whether their index is odd or even.

c. Show how to multiply two n-bit integers in O(nlg 3) steps, where each

step operates on at most a constant number of 1-bit values.

30-2 Multidimensional fast Fourier transform

The 1-dimensional discrete Fourier transform defined by equation

(30.8) generalizes to d dimensions. The input is a d-dimensional array A
= (aj1,j2,...,jd) whose dimensions are n1, n2, ... , nd, where n1n2 nd =
n. The d-dimensional discrete Fourier transform is defined by the

equation

for 0 k1 < n1, 0 k2 < n2, ... , 0 kd < nd.

a. Show how to produce a d-dimensional DFT by computing 1-

dimensional DFTs on each dimension in turn. That is, first compute

n/n1 separate 1-dimensional DFTs along dimension 1. Then, using the
result of the DFTs along dimension 1 as the input, compute n/n2

separate 1-dimensional DFTs along dimension 2. Using this result as

the input, compute n/n3 separate 1-dimensional DFTs along
dimension 3, and so on, through dimension d.

b. Show that the ordering of dimensions does not matter, so that if you
compute the 1-dimensional DFTs in any order of the d dimensions,
you compute the d-dimensional DFT.

c. Show that if you compute each 1-dimensional DFT by computing the
fast Fourier transform, the total time to compute a d-dimensional
DFT is O(n lg n), independent of d.

30-3 Evaluating all derivatives of a polynomial at a point
Given a polynomial A(x) of degree-bound n, we define its tth derivative

by

In this problem, you will show how to determine A(t)(x0) for t = 0, 1, ...
, n - 1, given the coefficient representation (a0, a1, ... , an-1) of A(x)
and a point x0.
a. Given coefficients b0, b1, ... , bn-1 such that

show how to compute A(t)(x0), for t = 0, 1, ... , n - 1, in O(n) time.
b. Explain how to find b0, b1, ... , bn-1 in O(n lg n) time, given

for k = 0, 1, ... , n - 1.
c. Prove that

where f(j) = aj · j! and

d. Explain how to evaluate for k = 0, 1, ... , n - 1 in O(n lg n)

time. Conclude that you can evaluate all nontrivial derivatives of A(x)

at x0 in O(n lg n) time.

30-4 Polynomial evaluation at multiple points
Problem 2-3 showed how to evaluate a polynomial of degree-bound n at
a single point in O(n) time using Horner's rule. This chapter described
how to evaluate such a polynomial at all n complex roots of unity in O(n
lg n) time using the FFT. Now, you will show how to evaluate a
polynomial of degree-bound n at n arbitrary points in O(n lg2 n) time.

To do so, assume that you can compute the polynomial remainder

when one such polynomial is divided by another in O(n lg n) time. For
example, the remainder of 3x3 + x2 - 3x + 1 when divided by x2 + x +

2 is

(3x3 + x2 - 3x + 1) mod (x2 + x + 2) = -7x + 5.

Given the coefficient representation of a polynomial

and n points x0, x1, ... , xn-1, your goal is to compute the n values
A(x0), A(x1), ... , A(xn-1). For 0 i j n - 1, define the polynomials

and Qij(x) = A(x) mod Pij(x). Note that Qij(x) has
degree at most j - i.

a. Prove that A(x) mod (x - z) = A(z) for any point z.

b. Prove that Qkk(x) = A(xk) and that Q0,n-1(x) = A(x).

c. Prove that for i k j, we have both Qik(x) = Qij(x) mod Pik(x) and
Qkj(x) = Qij(x) mod Pkj(x).

d. Give an O(n lg2 n)-time algorithm to evaluate A(x0), A(x1), ... ,
A(xn-1).

30-5 FFT using modular arithmetic

As defined, the discrete Fourier transform requires computation with
complex numbers, which can result in a loss of precision due to roundoff errors. For some problems, the answer is known to contain only
integers, and a variant of the FFT based on modular arithmetic can
guarantee that the answer is calculated exactly. An example of such a
problem is that of multiplying two polynomials with integer coefficients.

Exercise 30.2-6 gives one approach, using a modulus of length (n) bits
to handle a DFT on n points. This problem explores another approach
that uses a modulus of the more reasonable length O(lg n), but it
requires that you understand the material of Chapter 31. Let n be an

exact power of 2.

a. You wish to search for the smallest k such that p = kn + 1 is prime.
Give a simple heuristic argument why you might expect k to be
approximately ln n. (The value of k might be much larger or smaller,
but you can reasonably expect to examine O(lg n) candidate values of
k on average.) How does the expected length of p compare to the
length of n?

Let g be a generator of , and let w = gk mod p.

b. Argue that the DFT and the inverse DFT are well-defined inverse
operations modulo p, where w is used as a principal nth root of unity.

c. Show how to make the FFT and its inverse work modulo p in O(n lg
n) time, where operations on words of O(lg n) bits take unit time.
Assume that the algorithm is given p and w.

d. Compute the DFT modulo p = 17 of the vector (0, 5, 3, 7, 7, 2, 1, 6).
(Hint: Verify and use the fact that g = 3 is a generator of .)

Chapter notes

Van Loan's book [442] provides an outstanding treatment of the fast
Fourier transform. Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery [365, 366]
offer a good description of the fast Fourier transform and its
applications. For an excellent introduction to signal processing, a
popular FFT application area, see the texts by Oppenheim and Schafer

[347] and Oppenheim and Willsky [348]. The Oppenheim and Schafer

book also shows how to handle cases in which n is not an exact power

of 2.
Fourier analysis is not limited to 1-dimensional data. It is widely

used in image processing to analyze data in two or more dimensions.
The books by Gonzalez and Woods [194] and Pratt [363] discuss
multidimensional Fourier transforms and their use in image processing,
and books by Tolimieri, An, and Lu [439] and Van Loan [442] discuss
the mathematics of multidimensional fast Fourier transforms.

Cooley and Tukey [101] are widely credited with devising the FFT in
the 1960s. The FFT had in fact been discovered many times previously,
but its importance was not fully realized before the advent of modern
digital computers. Although Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery
attribute the origins of the method to Runge and König in 1924, an
article by Heideman, Johnson, and Burrus [211] traces the history of
the FFT as far back as C. F. Gauss in 1805.

Frigo and Johnson [161] developed a fast and flexible
implementation of the FFT, called FFTW ("fastest Fourier transform in
the West"). FFTW is designed for situations requiring multiple DFT
computations on the same problem size. Before actually computing the
DFTs, FFTW executes a "planner," which, by a series of trial runs,
determines how best to decompose the FFT computation for the given
problem size on the host machine. FFTW adapts to use the hardware
cache efficiently, and once subproblems are small enough, FFTW solves
them with optimized, straight-line code. Moreover, FFTW has the

advantage of taking (n lg n) time for any problem size n, even when n

is a large prime.
Although the standard Fourier transform assumes that the input

represents points that are uniformly spaced in the time domain, other
techniques can approximate the FFT on "nonequispaced" data. The
article by Ware [449] provides an overview.

1 Interpolation is a notoriously tricky problem from the point of view of numerical stability.
Although the approaches described here are mathematically correct, small differences in the
inputs or round-off errors during computation can cause large differences in the result.

2 Many other authors define n differently: n = e-2i/n. This alternative definition tends to

be used for signal-processing applications. The underlying mathematics is substantially the

same with either definition of n.

3 The length n is actually what Section 30.1 referred to as 2n, since the degree-bound of the

given polynomials doubles prior to evaluation. In the context of polynomial multiplication,

therefore, we are actually working with complex (2n)th roots of unity.

4 The downside of iteratively updating is that round-off errors can accumulate, especially
for larger input sizes. Several techniques to limit the magnitude of FFT round-off errors have
been proposed, but are beyond the scope of this book. If several FFTs are going to be run on

inputs of the same size, then it might be worthwhile to directly precompute a table of all n/2

values of .

31 Number-Theoretic Algorithms

Number theory was once viewed as a beautiful but largely useless
subject in pure mathematics. Today number-theoretic algorithms are
used widely, due in large part to the invention of cryptographic schemes
based on large prime numbers. These schemes are feasible because we
can find large primes quickly, and they are secure because we do not
know how to factor the product of large primes (or solve related
problems, such as computing discrete logarithms) efficiently. This
chapter presents some of the number theory and related algorithms
that underlie such applications.

We start in Section 31.1 by introducing basic concepts of number
theory, such as divisibility, modular equivalence, and unique prime
factorization. Section 31.2 studies one of the world's oldest algorithms:
Euclid's algorithm for computing the greatest common divisor of two
integers, and Section 31.3 reviews concepts of modular arithmetic.

Section 31.4 then explores the set of multiples of a given number a,
modulo n, and shows how to find all solutions to the equation ax = b
(mod n) by using Euclid's algorithm. The Chinese remainder theorem is

presented in Section 31.5. Section 31.6 considers powers of a given

number a, modulo n, and presents a repeated-squaring algorithm for
efficiently computing ab mod n, given a, b, and n. This operation is at

the heart of efficient primality testing and of much modern
cryptography, such as the RSA public-key cryptosystem described in
Section 31.7. We wrap up in Section 31.8, which examines a randomized

primality test. This test finds large primes efficiently, an essential step in
creating keys for the RSA cryptosystem.

Size of inputs and cost of arithmetic computations

Because we'll be working with large integers, we need to adjust how to
think about the size of an input and about the cost of elementary
arithmetic operations.

In this chapter, a "large input" typically means an input containing
"large integers" rather than an input containing "many integers" (as for

sorting). Thus, the size of an input depends on the number of bits

required to represent that input, not just the number of integers in the

input. An algorithm with integer inputs a1, a2, ..., ak is a polynomialtime algorithm if it runs in time polynomial in 1g a1, 1g a2, ..., 1g ak,

that is, polynomial in the lengths of its binary-encoded inputs.
Most of this book considers the elementary arithmetic operations

(multiplications, divisions, or computing remainders) as primitive
operations that take one unit of time. Counting the number of such
arithmetic operations that an algorithm performs provides a basis for
making a reasonable estimate of the algorithm's actual running time on
a computer. Elementary operations can be time-consuming, however,
when their inputs are large. It thus becomes appropriate to measure

how many bit operations a number-theoretic algorithm requires. In this

model, multiplying two -bit integers by the ordinary method uses
(2) bit operations. Similarly, dividing a -bit integer by a shorter
integer or taking the remainder of a -bit integer when divided by a
shorter integer requires (2) time by simple algorithms. (See Exercise
31.1-12.) Faster methods are known. For example, a simple divide-andconquer method for multiplying two -bit integers has a running time of

(1g 3), and O( 1g 1g 1g ) time is possible. For practical purposes,

however, the (2) algorithm is often best, and we use this bound as a
basis for our analyses. In this chapter, we'll usually analyze algorithms
in terms of both the number of arithmetic operations and the number
of bit operations they require.