31.7 The RSA public-key cryptosystem

With a public-key cryptosystem, you can encrypt messages sent

between two communicating parties so that an eavesdropper who

overhears the encrypted messages will not be able to decode, or decrypt,

them. A public-key cryptosystem also enables a party to append an
unforgeable "digital signature" to the end of an electronic message.
Such a signature is the electronic version of a handwritten signature on
a paper document. It can be easily checked by anyone, forged by no
one, yet loses its validity if any bit of the message is altered. It therefore
provides authentication of both the identity of the signer and the
contents of the signed message. It is the perfect tool for electronically
signed business contracts, electronic checks, electronic purchase orders,
and other electronic communications that parties wish to authenticate.

The RSA public-key cryptosystem relies on the dramatic difference
between the ease of finding large prime numbers and the difficulty of
factoring the product of two large prime numbers. Section 31.8
describes an efficient procedure for finding large prime numbers.

Public-key cryptosystems

In a public-key cryptosystem, each participant has both a public key
and a secret key. Each key is a piece of information. For example, in the

RSA cryptosystem, each key consists of a pair of integers. The
participants "Alice" and "Bob" are traditionally used in cryptography

examples. We denote the public keys for Alice and Bob as PA and PB,
respectively, and likewise the secret keys are SA for Alice and SB for

Bob.
Each participant creates his or her own public and secret keys.

Secret keys are kept secret, but public keys can be revealed to anyone or
even published. In fact, it is often convenient to assume that everyone's
public key is available in a public directory, so that any participant can
easily obtain the public key of any other participant.

Figure 31.5 Encryption in a public key system. Bob encrypts the message M using Alice's
public key PA and transmits the resulting ciphertext C = PA(M) over a communication

channel to Alice. An eavesdropper who captures the transmitted ciphertext gains no

information about M. Alice receives C and decrypts it using her secret key to obtain the
original message M = SA(C).

The public and secret keys specify functions that can be applied to
any message. Let D denote the set of permissible messages. For
example, D might be the set of all finite-length bit sequences. The
simplest, and original, formulation of public-key cryptography requires
one-to-one functions from D to itself, based on the public and secret

keys. We denote the function based on Alice's public key PA by PA()
and the function based on her secret key SA by SA(). The functions
PA() and SA() are thus permutations of D. We assume that the
functions PA() and SA() are efficiently computable given the
corresponding keys PA and SA.

The public and secret keys for any participant are a "matched pair"
in that they specify functions that are inverses of each other. That is,

for any message M D. Transforming M with the two keys PA and SA
successively, in either order, yields back the original message M.

A public-key cryptosystem requires that Alice, and only Alice, be

able to compute the function SA() in any practical amount of time. This

assumption is crucial to keeping encrypted messages sent to Alice
private and to knowing that Alice's digital signatures are authentic.

Alice must keep her key SA secret. If she does not, whoever else has

access to SA can decrypt messages intended only for Alice and can also

forge her digital signature. The assumption that only Alice can

reasonably compute SA() must hold even though everyone knows PA
and can compute PA(), the inverse function to SA(), efficiently. These

requirements appear formidable, but we'll see how to satisfy them.
In a public-key cryptosystem, encryption works as shown in Figure

31.5. Suppose that Bob wishes to send Alice a message M encrypted so

that it looks like

Figure 31.6 Digital signatures in a public-key system. Alice signs the message M by
appending her digital signature = SA(M) to it. She transmits the message/signature pair (M,
) to Bob, who verifies it by checking the equation M = PA(). If the equation holds, he
accepts (M, ) as a message that Alice has signed.

unintelligible gibberish to an eavesdropper. The scenario for sending the
message goes as follows.

Bob obtains Alice's public key PA, perhaps from a public

directory or perhaps directly from Alice.

Bob computes the ciphertext C = PA(M) corresponding to the
message M and sends C to Alice.
When Alice receives the ciphertext C, she applies her secret key
SA to retrieve the original message: SA(C) = SA(PA(M)) = M.
Because SA() and PA() are inverse functions, Alice can compute M
from C. Because only Alice is able to compute SA(), only Alice can
compute M from C. Because Bob encrypts M using PA(), only Alice

can understand the transmitted message.

Digital signatures can be implemented within this formulation of a
public-key cryptosystem. (There are other ways to construct digital
signatures, but we won't go into them here.) Suppose now that Alice

wishes to send Bob a digitally signed response M. Figure 31.6 shows

how the digital-signature scenario proceeds.

Alice computes her digital signature for the message M using
her secret key SA and the equation = SA(M).

Alice sends the message/signature pair (M, ) to Bob.

When Bob receives (M, ), he can verify that it originated from
Alice by using Alice's public key to verify the equation M =
PA(). (Presumably, M contains Alice's name, so that Bob knows

whose public key to use.) If the equation holds, then Bob

concludes that the message M was actually signed by Alice. If the

equation fails to hold, Bob concludes either that the information
he received was corrupted by transmission errors or that the pair

(M, ) is an attempted forgery.

Because a digital signature provides both authentication of the signer's
identity and authentication of the contents of the signed message, it is
analogous to a handwritten signature at the end of a written document.

A digital signature must be verifiable by anyone who has access to
the signer's public key. A signed message can be verified by one party
and then passed on to other parties who can also verify the signature.
For example, the message might be an electronic check from Alice to
Bob. After Bob verifies Alice's signature on the check, he can give the
check to his bank, who can then also verify the signature and effect the
appropriate funds transfer.

A signed message may or may not be encrypted. The message can be
"in the clear" and not protected from disclosure. By composing the
above protocols for encryption and for signatures, Alice can create a
message to Bob that is both signed and encrypted. Alice first appends
her digital signature to the message and then encrypts the resulting
message/signature pair with Bob's public key. Bob decrypts the received
message with his secret key to obtain both the original message and its

digital signature. Bob can then verify the signature using Alice's public
key. The corresponding combined process using paper-based systems
would be to sign the paper document and then seal the document inside
a paper envelope that is opened only by the intended recipient.

The RSA cryptosystem

In the RSA public-key cryptosystem, a participant creates a public key

and a secret key with the following procedure:

1. Select at random two large prime numbers p and q such that p
q. The primes p and q might be, say, 1024 bits each.

2. Compute n = pq.
3. Select a small odd integer e that is relatively prime to (n),

which, by equation (31.21), equals (p 1)(q 1).
4. Compute d as the multiplicative inverse of e, modulo (n).

(Corollary 31.26 guarantees that d exists and is uniquely defined.
You can use the technique of Section 31.4 to compute d, given e
and (n).)
5. Publish the pair P = (e, n) as the participant's RSA public key.
6. Keep secret the pair S = (d, n) as the participant's RSA secret
key.

For this scheme, the domain D is the set n. To transform a message
M associated with a public key P = (e, n), compute

To transform a ciphertext C associated with a secret key S = (d, n),

compute

These equations apply to both encryption and signatures. To create a
signature, the signer's secret key is applied to the message to be signed,
rather than to a ciphertext. To verify a signature, the public key of the

signer is applied to the signature rather than to a message to be

encrypted.

To implement the public-key and secret-key operations (31.37) and

(31.38), you can use the procedure MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION

described in Section 31.6. To analyze the running time of these

operations, assume that the public key (e, n) and secret key (d, n) satisfy
1g e = O(1), 1g d , and 1g n . Then, applying a public key requires
O(1) modular multiplications and uses O(2) bit operations. Applying a
secret key requires O() modular multiplications, using O(3) bit

operations.

Theorem 31.36 (Correctness of RSA)

The RSA equations (31.37) and (31.38) define inverse transformations

of n satisfying equations (31.35) and (31.36).

Proof From equations (31.37) and (31.38), we have that for any M
n,
P(S(M)) = S(P(M)) = Med (mod n).
Since e and d are multiplicative inverses modulo (n) = (p 1)(q 1),
ed = 1 + k(p 1)(q 1)
for some integer k. But then, if M 0 (mod p), we have

Med = M(Mp1)k(q1) (mod p)

= M((M mod p)p1)k(q1) (mod p)

= M(1)k(q1) (mod p) (by Theorem 31.31)

=M (mod p)

Also, Med = M (mod p) if M = 0 (mod p). Thus,
Med = M (mod p)
for all M. Similarly,

Med = M (mod q)

for all M. Thus, by Corollary 31.29 to the Chinese remainder theorem,

Med = M (mod n)

for all M.

The security of the RSA cryptosystem rests in large part on the
difficulty of factoring large integers. If an adversary can factor the

modulus n in a public key, then the adversary can derive the secret key
from the public key, using the knowledge of the factors p and q in the

same way that the creator of the public key used them. Therefore, if
factoring large integers is easy, then breaking the RSA cryptosystem is
easy. The converse statement, that if factoring large integers is hard,
then breaking RSA is hard, is unproven. After two decades of research,
however, no easier method has been found to break the RSA public-key

cryptosystem than to factor the modulus n. And factoring large

integers is surprisingly difficult. By randomly selecting and multiplying
together two 1024-bit primes, you can create a public key that cannot be
"broken" in any feasible amount of time with current technology. In the
absence of a fundamental breakthrough in the design of numbertheoretic algorithms, and when implemented with care following
recommended standards, the RSA cryptosystem is capable of providing
a high degree of security in applications.

In order to achieve security with the RSA cryptosystem, however,
you should use integers that are quite long--more than 1000 bits--to
resist possible advances in the art of factoring. In 2021, RSA moduli
are commonly in the range of 2048 to 4096 bits. To create moduli of
such sizes, you must find large primes efficiently. Section 31.8 addresses
this problem.

For efficiency, RSA is often used in a "hybrid" or "keymanagement" mode with fast cryptosystems that are not public-key

cryptosystems. With such a symmetric-key system, the encryption and
decryption keys are identical. If Alice wishes to send a long message M
to Bob privately, she selects a random key K for the fast symmetric-key

cryptosystem and encrypts M using K, obtaining ciphertext C, where C
is as long as M, but K is quite short. Then she encrypts K using Bob's
public RSA key. Since K is short, computing PB(K) is fast (much faster
than computing PB(M)). She then transmits (C, PB(K)) to Bob, who
decrypts PB(K) to obtain K and then uses K to decrypt C, obtaining M.

A similar hybrid approach creates digital signatures efficiently. This

approach combines RSA with a public collision-resistant hash function h

--a function that is easy to compute but for which it is computationally

infeasible to find two messages M and M such that h(M) = h(M). The
value h(M) is a short (say, 256-bit) "fingerprint" of the message M. If
Alice wishes to sign a message M, she first applies h to M to obtain the
fingerprint h(M), which she then encrypts with her secret key. She sends
(M, SA(h(M))) to Bob as her signed version of M. Bob can verify the
signature by computing h(M) and verifying that PA applied to
SA(h(M)) as received equals h(M). Because no one can create two

messages with the same fingerprint, it is computationally infeasible to

alter a signed message and preserve the validity of the signature.

One way to distribute public keys uses certificates. For example,
assume that there is a "trusted authority" T whose public key is known
by everyone. Alice can obtain from T a signed message (her certificate)
stating that "Alice's public key is PA." This certificate is "selfauthenticating" since everyone knows PT. Alice can include her

certificate with her signed messages, so that the recipient has Alice's

public key immediately available in order to verify her signature.

Because her key was signed by T, the recipient knows that Alice's key is

really Alice's.

Exercises

31.7-1
Consider an RSA key set with p = 11, q = 29, n = 319, and e = 3. What
value of d should be used in the secret key? What is the encryption of
the message M = 100?

31.7-2
Prove that if Alice's public exponent e is 3 and an adversary obtains
Alice's secret exponent d, where 0 < d < (n), then the adversary can
factor Alice's modulus n in time polynomial in the number of bits in n.

(Although you are not asked to prove it, you might be interested to

know that this result remains true even if the condition e = 3 is

removed. See Miller [327].)

31.7-3

Prove that RSA is multiplicative in the sense that

PA(M1)PA(M2) = PA(M1M2) (mod n).

Use this fact to prove that if an adversary had a procedure that could

efficiently decrypt 1% of messages from n encrypted with PA, then the

adversary could employ a probabilistic algorithm to decrypt every

message encrypted with PA with high probability.