32.1 The naive string-matching algorithm

The NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER procedure finds all valid shifts

using a loop that checks the condition P[1:m] = T[s+1:s+m] for each of
the n-m+1 possible values of s.

NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER(T, P, n, m)

1 for s = 0 to n m

2 if P[1:m] == T[s + 1:s + m]

3 print "Pattern occurs with shift" s

Figure 32.3 portrays the naive string-matching procedure as sliding a

"template" containing the pattern over the text, noting for which shifts

all of the characters on the template equal the corresponding

characters in the text. The for loop of lines 13 considers each possible

shift explicitly. The test in line 2 determines whether the current shift is

valid. This test implicitly loops to check corresponding character

positions until all positions match successfully or a mismatch is found.

Line 3 prints out each valid shift s.
Procedure NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER takes O((n m + 1)m)

time, and this bound is tight in the worst case. For example, consider the

text string an (a string of na's) and the pattern am. For each of the
n-m+1 possible values of the shift s, the implicit loop on line 2 to
compare corresponding characters must execute m times to validate the
shift. The worst-case running time is thus ((n - m + 1)m), which is
(n2) if m = n/2. Because it requires no preprocessing, NAIVE-

STRING-MATCHER's running time equals its matching time.

NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER is far from an optimal procedure for

this problem. Indeed, this chapter will show that the Knuth-Morris-

Pratt algorithm is much better in the worst case. The naive string-

matcher is inefficient because it entirely ignores information gained

about the text for one value of s when it considers other values of s.
Such information can be quite valuable, however. For example, if P =
aaab and s = 0 is valid, then none of the shifts 1, 2, or 3 are valid, since
T[4] = b. The following sections examine several ways to make effective

use of this sort of information.

Figure 32.3 The operation of the NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER procedure for the pattern P =
aab and the text T = acaabc. Imagine the pattern P as a template that slides next to the text.

(a)(d) The four successive alignments tried by the naive string matcher. In each part, vertical
lines connect corresponding regions found to match (shown in blue), and a red jagged line
connects the first mismatched character found, if any. The algorithm finds one occurrence of

the pattern, at shift s = 2, shown in part (c).

Exercises

32.1-1
Show the comparisons the naive string matcher makes for the pattern P
= 0001 in the text T = 000010001010001.

32.1-2
Suppose that all characters in the pattern P are different. Show how to
accelerate NAIVE-STRING-MATCHER to run in O(n) time on an ncharacter text T.

32.1-3
Suppose that pattern P and text T are randomly chosen strings of length
m and n, respectively, from the d-ary alphabet d = {0, 1, ..., d 1},
where d 2. Show that the expected number of character-to-character

comparisons made by the implicit loop in line 2 of the naive algorithm is

over all executions of this loop. (Assume that the naive algorithm stops
comparing characters for a given shift once it finds a mismatch or
matches the entire pattern.) Thus, for randomly chosen strings, the
naive algorithm is quite efficient.

32.1-4

Suppose that the pattern P may contain occurrences of a gap character
that can match an arbitrary string of characters (even one of 0

length). For example, the pattern ab ba c occurs in the text
cabccbacbacab as

and as

The gap character may occur an arbitrary number of times in the
pattern but not at all in the text. Give a polynomial-time algorithm to

determine whether such a pattern P occurs in a given text T, and

analyze the running time of your algorithm.