33.1 Clustering

Suppose that you have a large number of data points (examples), and
you wish to group them into classes based on how similar they are to
each other. For example, each data point might represent a celestial
star, giving its temperature, size, and spectral characteristics. Or, each
data point might represent a fragment of recorded speech. Grouping
these speech fragments appropriately might reveal the set of accents of
the fragments. Once a grouping of the training data points is found,
new data can be placed into an appropriate group, facilitating star-type
recognition or speech recognition.

These situations, along with many others, fall under the umbrella of

clustering. The input to a clustering problem is a set of n examples
(objects) and an integer k, with the goal of dividing the examples into at
most k disjoint clusters such that the examples in each cluster are

similar to each other. The clustering problem has several variations. For

example, the integer k might not be given, but instead arises out of the
clustering procedure. In this section we presume that k is given.

Feature vectors and similarity

Let's formally define the clustering problem. The input is a set of

n examples. Each example has a set of attributes in common with all

other examples, though the attribute values may vary among examples.

For example, the clustering problem shown in Figure 33.1 clusters n =
49 examples--48 state capitals plus the District of Columbia--into k =

4 clusters. Each example has two attributes: the latitude and longitude

of the capital. In a given clustering problem, each example has d
attributes, with an example x specified by a d-dimensional feature vector

x = (x1, x2, ..., xd).

Here, xa for a = 1, 2, ..., d is a real number giving the value of attribute
a for example x. We call x the point in d representing the example. For
the example in Figure 33.1, each capital x has its latitude in x1 and its
longitude in x2.

In order to cluster similar points together, we need to define

similarity. Instead, let's define the opposite: the dissimilarity (x, y) of

points x and y is the squared Euclidean distance between them:

Of course, for (x, y) to be well defined, all attribute values must be
present. If any are missing, then you might just ignore that example, or
you could fill in a missing attribute value with the median value for that
attribute.

The attribute values are often "messy" in other ways, so that some
"data cleaning" is necessary before the clustering algorithm is run. For
example, the scale of attribute values can vary widely across attributes.
In the example of Figure 33.1, the scales of the two attributes vary by a
factor of 2, since latitude ranges from -90 to +90 degrees but longitude
ranges from -180 to +180 degrees. You can imagine other scenarios
where the differences in scales are even greater. If the examples contain
information about students, one attribute might be grade-point average

but another might be family income. Therefore, the attribute values are
usually scaled or normalized, so that no single attribute can dominate
the others when computing dissimilarities. One way to do so is by
scaling attribute values with a linear transform so that the minimum
value becomes 0 and the maximum value becomes 1. If the attribute
values are binary values, then no scaling may be needed. Another
option is scaling so that the values for each attribute have mean 0 and
unit variance. Sometimes it makes sense to choose the same scaling rule
for several related attributes (for example, if they are lengths measured
to the same scale).

Figure 33.1 The iterations of Lloyd's procedure when clustering the capitals of the lower 48

states and the District of Columbia into k = 4 clusters. Each capital has two attributes:
latitude and longitude. Each iteration reduces the value f, measuring the sum of squares of
distances of all capitals to their cluster centers, until the value of f does not change. (a) The

initial four clusters, with the capitals of Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, and Tennessee chosen as
centers. (b)(k) Iterations of Lloyd's procedure. (l) The 11th iteration results in the same value

of f as the 10th iteration in part (k), and so the procedure terminates.

Also, the choice of dissimilarity measure is somewhat arbitrary. The
use of the sum of squared differences as in equation (33.1) is not

required, but it is a conventional choice and mathematically convenient.
For the example of Figure 33.1, you might use the actual distance
between capitals rather than equation (33.1).

Clusterings

With the notion of similarity (actually, dissimilarity) defined, let's see
how to define clusters of similar points. Let S denote the given set of n
points in d. In some applications the points are not necessarily
distinct, so that S is a multiset rather than a set.

Because the goal is to create k clusters, we define a k-clustering of S
as a decomposition of S into a sequence S(1), S(2), ..., S(k) of k
disjoint subsets, or clusters, so that

S = S(1) S(2) S(k).

A cluster may be empty, for example if k > 1 but all of the points in S

have the same attribute values.

There are many ways to define a k-clustering of S and many ways to
evaluate the quality of a given k-clustering. We consider here only kclusterings of S that are defined by a sequence C of k centers

C = c(1), c(2), ..., c(k),

where each center is a point in d, and the nearest-center rule says that
a point x may belong to cluster S() if the center of no other cluster is
closer to x than the center c() of S():

x S() only if (x, c()) = min {(x, c(j)): 1 j k}.

A center can be anywhere, and not necessarily a point in S.

Ties are possible and must be broken so that each point lies in
exactly one cluster. In general, ties may be broken arbitrarily, although
we'll need the property that we never change which cluster a point x is

assigned to unless the distance from x to its new cluster center is strictly
smaller than the distance from x to its old cluster center. That is, if the

current cluster has a center that is one of the closest cluster centers to
x, then don't change which cluster x is assigned to.

The k-means problem is then the following: given a set S of n points
and a positive integer k, find a sequence C = c(1), c(2), ..., c(k) of k
center points minimizing the sum f(S, C) of the squared distance from

each point to its nearest center, where

In the second line, the k-clustering S(1),S(2),...,S(k) is defined by the
centers C and the nearest-center rule. See Exercise 33.1-1 for an

alternative formulation based on pairwise interpoint distances.

Is there a polynomial-time algorithm for the k-means problem?

Probably not, because it is NP-hard [310]. As we'll see in Chapter 34,
NP-hard problems have no known polynomial-time algorithm, but
nobody has ever proven that polynomial-time algorithms for NP-hard
problems cannot exist. Although we know of no polynomial-time
algorithm that finds the global minimum over all clusterings (according

to equation (33.2)), we can find a local minimum.
Lloyd [304] proposed a simple procedure that finds a sequence C of k

centers that yields a local minimum of f(S, C). A local minimum in the
k-means problem satisfies two simple properties: each cluster has an

optimal center (defined below), and each point is assigned to the cluster
(or one of the clusters) with the closest center. Lloyd's procedure finds a
good clustering--possibly optimal--that satisfies these two properties.
These properties are necessary, but not sufficient, for optimality.

Optimal center for a given cluster

In an optimal solution to the k-means problem, each center point must
be the centroid, or mean, of the points in its cluster. The centroid is a d-

dimensional point, where the value in each dimension is the mean of the
values of all the points in the cluster in that dimension (that is, the mean

of the corresponding attribute values in the cluster). That is, if c( ) is

the centroid for cluster S(), then for attributes a = 1, 2, ..., d, we have

Over all attributes, we write

Theorem 33.1
Given a nonempty cluster S( ), its centroid (or mean) is the unique
choice for the cluster center c() d that minimizes

Proof We wish to minimize, by choosing c() d, the sum

For each attribute a, the term summed is a convex quadratic function in

. To minimize this function, take its derivative with respect to and
set it to 0:

or, equivalently,

Since the minimum is obtained uniquely when each coordinate of is

the average of the corresponding coordinate for x S( ), the overall

minimum is obtained when c( ) is the centroid of the points x, as in
equation (33.3).

Optimal clusters for given centers

The following theorem shows that the nearest-center rule--assigning
each point x to one of the clusters whose center is nearest to x--yields

an optimal solution to the k-means problem.

Theorem 33.2
Given a set S of n points and a sequence c(1), c(2), ..., c(k) of k
centers, a clustering S(1), S(2), ..., S(k) minimizes

if and only if it assigns each point x S to a cluster S() that minimizes

(x, c()).

Proof The proof is straightforward: each point x S contributes

exactly once to the sum (33.4), and choosing to put x in a cluster whose
center is nearest minimizes the contribution from x.

Lloyd's procedure
Lloyd's procedure just iterates two operations--assigning points to
clusters based on the nearest-center rule, followed by recomputing the
centers of clusters to be their centroids--until the results converge.
Here is Lloyd's procedure:

Input: A set S of points in d, and a positive integer k.
Output: A k-clustering S(1), S(2), ..., S(k) of S with a sequence of

centers c(1), c(2), ..., c(k).

1. Initialize centers: Generate an initial sequence c(1), c(2), ...,

c(k) of k centers by picking k points independently from S at

random. (If the points are not necessarily distinct, see Exercise

33.1-3.) Assign all points to cluster S(1) to begin.

2. Assign points to clusters: Use the nearest-center rule to define

the clustering S(1), S(2), ..., S(k). That is, assign each point x
S to a cluster S( ) having a nearest center (breaking ties

arbitrarily, but not changing the assignment for a point x unless
the new cluster center is strictly closer to x than the old one).

3. Stop if no change: If step 2 did not change the assignments of

any points to clusters, then stop and return the clustering S(1),
S(2), ..., S(k) and the associated centers c(1), c(2), ..., c(k).

Otherwise, go to step 4.

4. Recompute centers as centroids: For = 1, 2, ..., k, compute the
center c() of cluster S() as the centroid of the points in S(). (If
S() is empty, let c() be the zero vector.) Then go to step 2.

It is possible for some of the clusters returned to be empty, particularly
if many of the input points are identical.

Lloyd's procedure always terminates. By Theorem 33.1, recomputing

the centers of each cluster as the cluster centroid cannot increase f(S,
C). Lloyd's procedure ensures that a point is reassigned to a different
cluster only when such an operation strictly decreases f(S, C). Thus

each iteration of Lloyd's procedure, except the last iteration, must

strictly decrease f(S, C). Since there are only a finite number of possible
k-clusterings of S (at most kn), the procedure must terminate.

Furthermore, once one iteration of Lloyd's procedure yields no decrease

in f, further iterations would not change anything, and the procedure

can stop at this locally optimum assignment of points to clusters.

If Lloyd's procedure really required kn iterations, it would be

impractical. In practice, it sometimes suffices to terminate the

procedure when the percentage decrease in f(S, C) in the latest iteration

falls below a predetermined threshold. Because Lloyd's procedure is
guaranteed to find only a locally optimal clustering, one approach to
finding a good clustering is to run Lloyd's procedure many times with
different randomly chosen initial centers, taking the best result.

The running time of Lloyd's procedure is proportional to the number

T of iterations. In one iteration, assigning points to clusters based on
the nearest-center rule requires O(dkn) time, and recomputing new
centers for each cluster requires O(dn) time (because each point is in
one cluster). The overall running time of the k-means procedure is thus
O(Tdkn).

Lloyd's algorithm illustrates an approach common to many machinelearning algorithms:

First, define a hypothesis space in terms an appropriate sequence
of parameters, so that each is associated with a specific

hypothesis h. (For the k-means problem, is a dk-dimensional
vector, equivalent to C, containing the d-dimensional center of
each of the k clusters, and h is the hypothesis that each data

point x should be grouped with a cluster having a center closest
to x.)

Second, define a measure f(E, ) describing how poorly
hypothesis h fits the given training data E. Smaller values of f(E,

) are better, and a (locally) optimal solution (locally) minimizes

f(E, ). (For the k-means problem, f(E, ) is just f(S, C).)

Third, given a set of training data E, use a suitable optimization
procedure to find a value of * that minimizes f(E, *), at least
locally. (For the k-means problem, this value of * is the sequence
C of k center points returned by Lloyd's algorithm.)

Return * as the answer.

In this framework, we see that optimization becomes a powerful tool for
machine learning. Using optimization in this way is flexible. For

example, regularization terms can be incorporated in the function to be

minimized, in order to penalize hypotheses that are "too complicated"

and that "overfit" the training data. (Regularization is a complex topic
that isn't pursued further here.)

Examples

Figure 33.1 demonstrates Lloyd's procedure on a set of n = 49 cities: 48
U.S. state capitals and the District of Columbia. Each city has d = 2

dimensions: latitude and longitude. The initial clustering in part (a) of
the figure has the initial cluster centers arbitrarily chosen as the capitals
of Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, and Tennessee. As the procedure

iterates, the value of the function f decreases, until the 11th iteration in

part (l), where it remains the same as in the 10th iteration in part (k).
Lloyd's procedure then terminates with the clusters shown in part (l).

As Figure 33.2 shows, Lloyd's procedure can also apply to "vector
quantization." Here, the goal is to reduce the number of distinct colors
required to represent a photograph, thereby allowing the photograph
to be greatly compressed (albeit in a lossy manner). In part (a) of the
figure, an original photograph 700 pixels wide and 500 pixels high uses
24 bits (three bytes) per pixel to encode a triple of red, green, and blue
(RGB) primary color intensities. Parts (b)(e) of the figure show the
results of using Lloyd's procedure to compress the picture from a initial

space of 224 possible values per pixel to a space of only k = 4, k = 16, k
= 64, or k = 256 possible values per pixel; these k values are the cluster

centers. The photograph can then be represented with only 2, 4, 6, or 8
bits per pixel, respectively, instead of the 24-bits per pixel needed by the
initial photograph. An auxiliary table, the "palette," accompanies the

compressed image; it holds the k 24-bit cluster centers and is used to

map each pixel value to its 24-bit cluster center when the photo is
decompressed.

Exercises

33.1-1
Show that the objective function f(S, C) of equation (33.2) may be

alternatively written as

33.1-2
Give an example in the plane with n = 4 points and k = 2 clusters where
an iteration of Lloyd's procedure does not improve f(S, C), yet the k-

clustering is not optimal.

33.1-3

When the input to Lloyd's procedure contains many repeated points, a
different initialization procedure might be used. Describe a way to pick
a number of centers at random that maximizes the number of distinct

centers picked. (Hint: See Exercise 5.3-5.)

33.1-4
Show how to find an optimal k-clustering in polynomial time when
there is just one attribute (d = 1).

Figure 33.2 Using Lloyd's procedure for vector quantization to compress a photo by using
fewer colors. (a) The original photo has 350,000 pixels (700 × 500), each a 24-bit RGB
(red/blue/green) triple of 8-bit values; these pixels (colors) are the "points" to be clustered.
Points repeat, so there are only 79,083 distinct colors (less than 224). After compression, only

k distinct colors are used, so each pixel is represented by only 1g k bits instead of 24. A

"palette" maps these values back to 24-bit RGB values (the cluster centers). (b)(e) The same

photo with k = 4, 16, 64, and 256 colors. (Photo from standuppaddle, pixabay.com.)