33.2 Multiplicative-weights algorithms

This section considers problems that require you to make a series of
decisions. After each decision you receive feedback as to whether your
decision was correct. We will study a class of algorithms that are called

multiplicative-weights algorithms. This class of algorithms has a wide

variety of applications, including game playing in economics,
approximately solving linear-programming and multicommodity-flow
problems, and various applications in online machine learning. We
emphasize the online nature of the problem here: you have to make a
sequence of decisions, but some of the information needed to make the

ith decision appears only after you have already made the (i 1)st

decision. In this section, we look at one particular problem, known as
"learning from experts," and develop an example of a multiplicativeweights algorithm, called the weighted-majority algorithm.

Suppose that a series of events will occur, and you want to make
predictions about these events. For example, over a series of days, you

want to predict whether it is going to rain. Or perhaps you want to

predict whether the price of a stock will increase or decrease. One way

to approach this problem is to assemble a group of "experts" and use

their collective wisdom in order to make good predictions. Let's denote

the experts, n of them, by E1, E2, ..., En, and let's say that T events are

going to take place. Each event has an outcome of either 0 or 1, with

o(t) denoting the outcome of the tth event. Before event t, each expert

E(i) makes a prediction . You, as the "learner," then take the

set of n expert predictions for event t and produce a single prediction

p(t) {0, 1} of your own. You base your prediction only on the

predictions of the experts and anything you have learned about the

experts from their previous predictions. You do not use any additional

information about the event. Only after making your prediction do you

ascertain the outcome o(t) of event t. If your prediction p(t) matches

o(t), then you were correct; otherwise, you made a mistake. The goal is

to minimize the total number m of mistakes, where .

You can also keep track of the number of mistakes each expert makes:

expert Ei makes mi mistakes, where .

For example, suppose that you are following the price of a stock, and

each day you decide whether to invest in it for just that day by buying it

at the beginning of the day and selling it at the end of the day. If, on

some day, you buy the stock and it goes up, then you made the correct

decision, but if the stock goes down, then you made a mistake. Similarly,

if on some day, you do not buy the stock and it goes down, then you

made the correct decision, but if the stock goes up, then you made a

mistake. Since you would like to make as few mistakes as possible, you

use the advice of the experts to make your decisions.

We'll assume nothing about the movement of the stock. We'll also

assume nothing about the experts: the experts' predictions could be

correlated, they could be chosen to deceive you, or perhaps some are

not really experts after all. What algorithm would you use?

Before designing an algorithm for this problem, we need to consider

what is a fair way to evaluate our algorithm. It is reasonable to expect

that our algorithm performs better when the expert predictions are
better, and that it performs worse when the expert predictions are
worse. The goal of the algorithm is to limit the number of mistakes you
make to be close to the number of mistakes that the best of the experts
makes. At first, this goal might seem impossible, because you do not
know until the end which expert is best. We'll see, however, that by
taking the advice provided by all the experts into account, you can
achieve this goal. More formally, we use the notion of "regret," which
compares our algorithm to the performance of the best expert (in

hindsight) over all. Letting m* = min {mi : 1 i n} denote the number
of mistakes made by the best expert, the regret is m m*. The goal is to

design an algorithm with low regret. (Regret can be negative, although
it typically isn't, since it is rare that you do better than the best expert.)

As a warm-up, let's consider the case in which one of the experts
makes a correct prediction each time. Even without knowing who that
expert is, you can still achieve good results.

Lemma 33.3
Suppose that out of n experts, there is one who always makes the
correct prediction for all T events. Then there is an algorithm that
makes at most 1g n mistakes.

Proof The algorithm maintains a set S consisting of experts who have
not yet made a mistake. Initially, S contains all n experts. The

algorithm's prediction is always the majority vote of the predictions of

the experts remaining in set S. In case of a tie, the algorithm makes any
prediction. After each outcome is learned, set S is updated to remove all

the experts who made an incorrect prediction about that outcome.
We now analyze the algorithm. The expert who always makes the

correct prediction will always be in set S. Every time the algorithm
makes a mistake, at least half of the experts who were still in S also
make a mistake, and these experts are removed from S. If S is the set of

experts remaining after removing those who made a mistake, we have

that |S| |S|/2. The size of S can be halved at most 1g n times until |S|

= 1. From this point on, we know that the algorithm never makes a

mistake, since the set S consists only of the one expert who never makes

a mistake. Therefore, overall the algorithm makes at most 1g n

mistakes.

Exercise 33.2-1 asks you to generalize this result to the case when

there is no expert who makes perfect predictions and show that, for any

set of experts, there is an algorithm that makes at most m* 1g n
mistakes. The generalized algorithm begins in the same way. The set S

might become empty at some point, however. If that ever happens, reset

S to contain all the experts and continue the algorithm.

You can substantially improve your prediction ability by not just

tracking which experts have not made any mistakes, or have not made

any mistakes recently, to a more nuanced evaluation of the quality of

each expert. The key idea is to use the feedback you receive to update

your evaluation of how much trust to put in each expert. As the experts

make predictions, you observe whether they were correct and decrease

your confidence in the experts who make more mistakes. In this way,

you can learn over time which experts are more reliable and which are

less reliable, and weight their predictions accordlingly. The change in

weights is accomplished via multiplication, hence the term

"multiplicative weights."

The algorithm appears in the procedure WEIGHTED-MAJORITY

on the following page, which takes a set E = {E1, E2, ..., En} of experts,
a number T of events, the number n of experts, and a parameter 0 <

1/2 that controls how the weights change. The algorithm maintains

weights for i = 1, 2, ..., n and t = 1, 2, ..., T, where . The

for loop of lines 12 sets the initial weights to 1, capturing the idea

that with no knowledge, you trust each expert equally. Each iteration of

the main for loop of lines 318 does the following for an event t = 1, 2,
..., T. Each expert Ei makes a prediction for event t in line 4. Lines 58
compute upweight(t), the sum of the weights of the experts who predict
1 for event t, and downweight(t), the sum of the weights of the experts

who predict 0 for the event. Lines 911 decide the algorithm's

prediction p(t) for event t based on whichever weighted sum is larger
(breaking ties in favor of deciding 1). The outcome of event t is revealed

in line 12. Finally, lines 1417 decrease the weights of the experts who

made an incorrect prediction for event t by multiplying their weights by

1 , leaving alone the weights of the experts who correctly predicted

the event's outcome. Thus, the fewer mistakes each expert makes, the

higher that expert's weight.

The WEIGHTED-MAJORITY procedure doesn't do much worse

than any expert. In particular, it doesn't do much worse than the best

expert. To quantify this claim, let m(t) be the number of mistakes made
by the procedure through event t, and let be the number of mistakes
made by expert Ei through event t. The following theorem is the key.

WEIGHTED-MAJORITY(E, T, n, )

1for i = 1 to n

2 // trust each expert equally

3for t = 1 to T

4 each expert Ei E makes a prediction

5 // experts who predicted 1

6 // sum of weights of who predicted 1

7 // experts who predicted 0

8 // sum of weights of who predicted 0

9 if upweight(t) downweight(t)

10 p(t) = 1 // algorithm predicts 1

11 else p(t) = 0 // algorithm predicts 0

12 outcome o(t) is revealed

13 // If p(t) o(t), the algorithm made a mistake.

14 for i = 1 to n

15 if // if expert E(i) made a mistake ...

16 // ... then decrease that expert's weight

17 else

18 return p(t)

Theorem 33.4
When running WEIGHTED-MAJORITY, we have, for every expert Ei
and every event T T,

Proof Every time an expert Ei makes a mistake, its weight, which is

initially 1, is multiplied by 1 , and so we have

for t = 1, 2, ..., T.

We use a potential function , summing the weights for

all n experts after iteration t of the for loop of lines 318. Initially, we
have W(0) = n since all n weights start out with the value 1. Because
each expert belongs to either the set U or the set D (defined in lines 5
and 7 of WEIGHTED-MAJORITY), we always have W(t) =
upweight(t) + downweight(t) after each execution of line 8.

Consider an iteration t in which the algorithm makes a mistake in its

prediction, which means that either the algorithm predicts 1 and the

outcome is 0 or the algorithm predicts 0 and the outcome is 1. Without

loss of generality, assume that the algorithm predicts 1 and the outcome

is 0. The algorithm predicted 1 because upweight(t) downweight(t) in

line 9, which implies that

Each expert in U then has its weight multiplied by 1 , and each expert
in D has its weight unchanged. Thus, we have

Therefore, for every iteration t in which the algorithm makes a mistake,

we have

In an iteration where the algorithm does not make a mistake, some of
the weights decrease and some remain unchanged, so that we have

Since there are m(T) mistakes made through iteration T, and W(1) = n,

we can repeatedly apply inequality (33.8) to iterations where the
algorithm makes a mistake and inequality (33.9) to iterations where the
algorithm does not make a mistake, obtaining

Because the function W is the sum of the weights and all weights are

positive, its value exceeds any single weight. Therefore, using equation

(33.6) we have, for any expert Ei and for any iteration T T,

Combining inequalities (33.10) and (33.11) gives

Taking the natural logarithm of both sides yields

We now use the Taylor series expansion to derive upper and lower
bounds on the logarithmic factors in inequality (33.12). The Taylor

series for ln(1+x) is given in equation (3.22) on page 67. Substituting -x
for x, we have that for 0 < x 1/2,

Since each term on the right-hand side is negative, we can drop all terms

except the first and obtain an upper bound of ln(1 x) -x. Since 0 <

1/2, we have

For the lower bound, Exercise 33.2-2 asks you to show that ln(1 x)
-x - x2 when 0 < x 1/2, so that

Thus, we have

so that

Subtracting ln n from both sides of inequality (33.16) and then

multiplying both sides by -2/ yields , thus

proving the theorem.

Theorem 33.4 applies to any expert and any event T T. In

particular, we can compare against the best expert after all events have
occurred, producing the following corollary.

Corollary 33.5

At the end of procedure WEIGHTED-MAJORITY, we have

Let's explore this bound. Assuming that , we can

choose and plug into inequality (33.17) to obtain

and so the number of errors is at most twice the number of errors made

by the best expert plus a term that is often slower growing than m*.

Exercise 33.2-4 shows that you can decrease the bound on the number
of errors by a factor of 2 by using randomization, which leads to much

stronger bounds. In particular, the upper bound on regret (m m*) is
reduced from (1 + 2)m* + (2 ln n)/ to an expected value of m* + (ln
n)/, where both and are at most 1/2. Numerically, we can see that

if = 1/2, WEIGHTED-MAJORITY makes at most 3 times the number

of errors as the best expert, plus 4 ln n errors. As another example,
suppose that T = 1000 predictions are being made by n = 20 experts,

and the best expert is correct 95% of the time, making 50 errors. Then
WEIGHTED-MAJORITY makes at most 100(1+)+2 ln 20/ errors. By
choosing = 1/4, WEIGHTED-MAJORITY makes at most 149 errors,
or a success rate of at least 85%.

Multiplicative weights methods typically refer to a broader class of
algorithms that includes WEIGHTED-MAJORITY. The outcomes and
predictions need not be only 0 or 1, but can be real numbers, and there
can be a loss associated with a particular outcome and prediction. The
weights can be updated by a multiplicative factor that depends on the
loss, and the algorithm can, given a set of weights, treat them as a
distribution on experts and use them to choose an expert to follow in
each event. Even in these more general settings, bounds similar to
Theorem 33.4 hold.

Exercises

33.2-1

The proof of Lemma 33.3 assumes that some expert never makes a
mistake. It is possible to generalize the algorithm and analysis to
remove this assumption. The new algorithm begins in the same way. The

set S might become empty at some point, however. If that ever happens,
reset S to contain all the experts and continue the algorithm. Show that
the number of mistakes that this algorithm makes is at most m* 1g n.

33.2-2

Show that ln(1 x) -x x2 when 0 < x 1/2. (Hint: Start with

equation (33.13), group all the terms after the first three, and use
equation (A.7) on page 1142.)

33.2-3

Consider a randomized variant of the algorithm given in the proof of
Lemma 33.3, in which some expert never makes a mistake. At each step,

choose an expert Ei uniformly at random from the set S and then make
the same predication as Ei. Show that the expected number of mistakes
made by this algorithm is 1g n.

33.2-4

Consider a randomized version of WEIGHTED-MAJORITY. The
algorithm is the same, except for the prediction step, which interprets
the weights as a probability distribution over the experts and chooses

an expert Ei according to that distribution. It then chooses its
prediction to be the same as the prediction made by expert Ei. Show

that, for any 0 < < 1/2, the expected number of mistakes made by this

algorithm is at most (1 + )m* + (ln n)/.