33.3 Gradient descent

Suppose that you have a set {p1, p2, ..., pn} of points and you want to

find the line that best fits these points. For any line , there is a distance

di between each point pi and the line. You want to find the line that
minimizes some function f(d1, ..., dn). There are many possible choices
for the definition of distance and for the function f. For example, the

distance can be the projection distance to the line and the function can
be the sum of the squares of the distances. This type of problem is
common in data science and machine learning--the line is the
hypothesis that best describes the data--where the particular definition

of best is determined by the definition of distance and the objective f. If
the definition of distance and the function f are linear, then we have a

linear-programming problem, as discussed in Chapter 29. Although the

linear-programming framework captures several important problems,
many other problems, including various machine-learning problems,
have objectives and constraints that are not necessarily linear. We need
frameworks and algorithms to solve such problems.

In this section, we consider the problem of optimizing a continuous
function and discuss one of the most popular methods to do so:
gradient descent. Gradient descent is a general method for finding a

local minimum of a function f : n , where informally, a local
minimum of a function f is a point x for which f(x) f(x) for all x that

are "near" x. When the function is convex, it can find a point near the

global minimizer of f: an n-vector argument x = (x1, x2, ..., xn) such
that f(x) is minimum. For the intuitive idea behind gradient descent,

imagine being in a landscape of hills and valleys, and wanting to get to a
low point as quickly as possible. You survey the terrain and choose to
move in the direction that takes you downhill the fastest from your
current position. You move in that direction, but only for a short while,
because as you proceed, the terrain changes and you might need to
choose a different direction. So you stop, reevaluate the possible
directions and move another short distance in the steepest downhill
direction, which might differ from the direction of your previous
movement. You continue this process until you reach a point from
which all directions lead up. Such a point is a local minimum.

In order to make this informal procedure more formal, we need to
define the gradient of a function, which in the analogy above is a

measure of the steepness of the various directions. Given a function f :
n , its gradient f is a function f : n n comprising n partial

derivatives: . Analogous to the derivative of a

function of a single variable, the gradient can be viewed as a direction in

which the function value locally increases the fastest, and the rate of

that increase. This view is informal; in order to make it formal we would

have to define what local means and place certain conditions, such as

continuity or existence of derivatives, on the function. Nevertheless, this

view motivates the key step of gradient descent--move in the direction

opposite to the gradient, by a distance influenced by the magnitude of
the gradient.

The general procedure of gradient descent proceeds in steps. You

start at some initial point x(0), which is an n-vector. At each step t, you
compute the value of the gradient of f at point x(t), that is, (f)(x(t)),
which is also an n-vector. You then move in the direction opposite to
the gradient in each dimension at x(t) to arrive at the next point x(t+1),
which again is an n-vector. Because you moved in a monotonically
decreasing direction in each dimension, you should have that f(x(t+1))
f(x(t)). Several details are needed to turn this idea into an actual

algorithm. The two main details are that you need an initial point and
that you need to decide how far to move in the direction of the negative
gradient. You also need to understand when to stop and what you can
conclude about the quality of the solution found. We will explore these
issues further in this section, for both constrained minimization, where
there are additional constraints on the points, and unconstrained
minimization, where there are none.

Unconstrained gradient descent

In order to gain intuition, let's consider unconstrained gradient descent

in just one dimension, that is, when f is a function of a scalar x, so that f
: . In this case, the gradient f of f is just f(x), the derivative of f
with respect to x. Consider the function f shown in blue in Figure 33.3,
with minimizer x* and starting point x(0). The gradient (derivative) f
(x(0)), shown in orange, has a negative slope, so that a small step from
x(0) in the direction of increasing x results in a point x for which f(x) <
f(x(0)). Too large a step, however, results in a

Figure 33.3 A function f : , shown in blue. Its gradient at point x(0), in orange, has a
negative slope, and so a small increase in x from x(0) to x results in f(x) < f(x(0)). Small
increases in x from x(0) head toward , which gives a local minimum. Too large an increase in
x can end up at x, where f(x) > f(x(0)). Small steps starting from x(0) and going only in the
direction of decreasing values of f cannot end up at the global minimizer x*.

point x for which f(x) > f(x(0)), so this is a bad idea. Restricting
ourselves to small steps, where each one has f(x) < f(x), eventually

results in getting close to point , which gives a local minimum. By
taking only small downhill steps, however, gradient descent has no

chance to get to the global minimizer x*, given the starting point x(0).

We draw two observations from this simple example. First, gradient
descent converges toward a local minimum, and not necessarily a global
minimum. Second, the speed at which it converges and how it behaves
are related to properties of the function, to the initial point, and to the
step size of the algorithm.

The procedure GRADIENT-DESCENT on the facing page takes as

input a function f, an initial point x(0) n, a fixed step-size multiplier
> 0, and a number T > 0 of steps to take. Each iteration of the for
loop of lines 24 performs a step by computing the n-dimensional
gradient at point x(t) and then moving distance in the opposite
direction in the n-dimensional space. The complexity of computing the
gradient depends on the function f and can sometimes be expensive.

Line 3 sums the points visited. After the loop terminates, line 6 returns

x-avg, the average of all the points visited except for the last one, x(T).
It might seem more natural to return x(T), and in fact, in many
circumstances, you might prefer to have the function return x(T). For

the version we will analyze, however, we use x-avg.

GRADIENT-DESCENT(f, x(0), , T)

1 sum = 0 // n-dimensional vector, initially all 0

2 for t = 0 to T 1

3 sum = sum + x(t) // add each of n dimensions into sum

4 x(t+1) = x(t) · (f)(x(t)) // (f)(x(t)), x(t+1) are n-

5 x-avg = sum/T dimensional

// divide each of n dimensions by T

6 return x-avg

Figure 33.4 depicts how gradient descent ideally runs on a convex 1dimensional function.1 We'll define convexity more formally below, but
the figure shows that each iteration moves in the direction opposite to
the gradient, with the distance moved being proportional to the
magnitude of the gradient. As the iterations proceed, the magnitude of
the gradient decreases, and thus the distance moved along the
horizontal axis decreases. After each iteration, the distance to the
optimal point x* decreases. This ideal behavior is not guaranteed to
occur in general, but the analysis in the remainder of this section
formalizes when this behavior occurs and quantifies the number of
iterations needed. Gradient descent does not always work, however. We
have already seen that if the function is not convex, gradient descent
can converge to a local, rather than global, minimum. We have also seen
that if the step size is too large, GRADIENT-DESCENT can overshoot
the minimum and wind up farther away. (It is also possible to overshoot
the minimum and wind up closer to the optimum.)

Analysis of unconstrained gradient descent for convex functions

Our analysis of gradient descent focuses on convex functions.
Inequality (C.29) on page 1194 defines a convex function of one
variable, as shown in Figure 33.5. We can extend that definition to a

function f : n and say that f is convex if for all x, y n and for

all 0 1, we have

(Inequalities (33.18) and (C.29) are the same, except for the dimensions
of x and y.) We also assume that our convex functions are closed2 and
differentiable.

Figure 33.4 An example of running gradient descent on a convex function f : , shown in

blue. Beginning at point x(0), each iteration moves in the direction opposite to the gradient,
and the distance moved is proportional to the magnitude of the gradient. Orange lines
represent the negative of the gradient at each point, scaled by the step size . As the iterations
proceed, the magnitude of the gradient decreases, and the distance moved decreases
correspondingly. After each iteration, the distance to the optimal point x* decreases.

Figure 33.5 A convex function f : , shown in blue, with local and global minimizer x*.
Because f is convex, f(x + (1 )y) f(x) + (1 )f(y) for any two values x and y and all 0

1, shown for a particular value of . Here, the orange line segment represents all values

f(x) + (1 )f(y) for 0 1, and it is above the blue line.

A convex function has the property that any local minimum is also a
global minimum. To verify this property, consider inequality (33.18),
and suppose for the purpose of contradiction that x is a local minimum

but not a global minimum and y x is a global minimum, so f(y) < f(x).

Then we have

f(x + (1 )y) f(x) + (1 )f(y) (by inequality (33.18))
< f(x) + (1 )f(x)
= f(x).

Thus, letting approach 1, we see that there is another point near x, say

x, such that f(x) < f(x), so x is not a local minimum.

Convex functions have several useful properties. The first property,
whose proof we leave as Exercise 33.3-1, says that a convex function
always lies above its tangent hyperplane. In the context of gradient
descent, angle brackets denote the notation for inner product defined
on page 1219 rather than denoting a sequence.

Lemma 33.6
For any convex differentiable function f : n and for all x, y n,
we have f(x) f(y) + (f)(x), x y.

The second property, which Exercise 33.3-2 asks you to prove, is a
repeated application of the definition of convexity in inequality (33.18).

Lemma 33.7
For any convex function f : n , for any integer T 1, and for all
x(0), ..., x(T1) n, we have

The left-hand side of inequality (33.19) is the value of f at the vector

x-avg that GRADIENT-DESCENT returns.
We now proceed to analyze GRADIENT-DESCENT. It might not

return the exact global minimizer x*. We use an error bound , and we

want to choose T so that f(x-avg) f(x*) at termination. The value
of depends on the number T of iterations and two additional values.

First, since you expect it to be better to start close to the global
minimizer, is a function of

the euclidean norm (or distance, defined on page 1219) of the difference
between x(0) and x*. The error bound is also a function of a quantity

we call L, which is an upper bound on the magnitude (f)(x) of the

gradient, so that

where x ranges over all the points x(0), ..., x(T1) whose gradients are

computed by GRADIENT-DESCENT. Of course, we don't know the

values of L and R, but for now let's assume that we do. We'll discuss

later how to remove these assumptions. The analysis of GRADIENTDESCENT is summarized in the following theorem.

Theorem 33.8
Let x* n be the minimizer of a convex function f, and suppose that
an execution of GRADIENT-DESCENT(f, x(0), , T) returns x-avg,

where and R and L are defined in equations (33.20) and
(33.21). Let . Then we have f(x-avg) f(x*) .

We now prove this theorem. We do not give an absolute bound on

how much progress each iteration makes. Instead, we use a potential

function, as in Section 16.3. Here, we define a potential (t) after
computing x(t), such that (t) 0 for t = 0, ..., T. We define the
amortized progress in the iteration that computes x(t) as

Along with including the change in potential ((t + 1) (t)), equation

(33.22) also subtracts the minimum value f(x*) because ultimately, you
care not about the values f(x(t)) but about how close they are to f(x*).
Suppose that we can show that p(t) B for some value B and t = 0, ...,
T 1. Then we can substitute for p(t) using equation (33.22), giving

Summing inequality (33.23) over t = 0, ..., T 1 yields

Observing that we have a telescoping series on the right and regrouping
terms, we have that

Dividing by T and dropping the positive term (T) gives

and thus we have

In other words, if we can show that p(t) B for some value B and

choose a potential function where (0) is not too large, then inequality

(33.25) tells us how close the function value f(x-avg) is to the function
value f(x*) after T iterations. That is, we can set the error bound to B
+ (0)/T.

In order to bound the amortized progress, we need to come up with

a concrete potential function. Define the potential function (t) by

that is, the potential function is proportional to the square of the
distance between the current point and the minimizer x*. With this
potential function in hand, the next lemma provides a bound on the
amortized progress made in any iteration of GRADIENT-DESCENT.

Lemma 33.9
Let x* n be the minimizer of a convex function f, and consider an
execution of GRADIENT-DESCENT(f, x(0), , T). Then for each point
x(t) computed by the procedure, we have that

Proof We first bound the potential change (t + 1) (t). Using the
definition of (t) from equation (33.26), we have

From line 4 in GRADIENT-DESCENT, we know that

and so we would like to rewrite equation (33.27) to have x(t+1) x(t)

terms. As Exercise 33.3-3 asks you to prove, for any two vectors a, b

n, we have

Letting a = x(t) x* and b = x(t+1) x(t), we can write the right-hand

side of equation (33.27) as . Then we can express the
potential change as

and thus we have

We can now proceed to bound p(t). By the bound on the potential
change from inequality (33.31), and using the definition of L (inequality

(33.21)), we have

sult in the following theorem

Having bounded the amortized progress in one step, we now analyze
the entire GRADIENT-DESCENT procedure, completing the proof of
Theorem 33.8.

Proof of Theorem 33.8 Inequality (33.25) tells us that if we have an
upper bound of B for p(t), then we also have the bound f(x-avg) f(x*)
B + (0)/T. By equations (33.20) and (33.26), we have that (0) =
R2/(2). Lemma 33.9 gives us the upper bound of B = L2/2, and so we

have

Our choice of in the statement of Theorem 33.8 balances

the two terms, and we obtain

Since we chose in the theorem statement, the proof is
complete.

Continuing under the assumption that we know R (from equation

(33.20)) and L (from inequality (33.21)), we can think of the analysis in

a slightly different way. We can presume that we have a target accuracy

and then compute the number of iterations needed. That is, we can

solve for T, obtaining T = R2L2/2. The number of

iterations thus depends on the square of R and L and, most

importantly, on 1/2. (The definition of L from inequality (33.21)

depends on T, but we may know an upper bound on L that doesn't

depend on the particular value of T.) Thus, if you want to halve your

error bound, you need to run four times as many iterations.

It is quite possible that we don't really know R and L, since you'd
need to know x* in order to know R (since R = x(0) x*), and you

might not have an explicit upper bound on the gradient, which would

provide L. You can, however, interpret the analysis of gradient descent

as a proof that there is some step size for which the procedure makes
progress toward the minimum. You can then compute a step size for

which f(x(t)) f(x(t+1)) is large enough. In fact, not having a fixed step

size multiplier can actually help in practice, as you are free to use any

step size s that achieves sufficient decrease in the value of f. You can

search for a step size that achieves a large decrease via a binary-search-

like routine, which is often called line search. For a given function f and
step size s, define the function g(x(t), s) = f(x(t)) s(f)(x(t)). Start
with a small step size s for which g(x(t), s) f(x(t)). Then repeatedly
double s until g(x(t), 2s) g(x(t), s), and then perform a binary search
in the interval [s, 2s]. This procedure can produce a step size that

achieves a significant decrease in the objective function. In other

circumstances, however, you may know good upper bounds on R and L,

typically from problem-specific information, which can suffice.

The dominant computational step in each iteration of the for loop of
lines 24 is computing the gradient. The complexity of computing and
evaluating a gradient varies widely, depending on the application at
hand. We'll discuss several applications later.

Constrained gradient descent

We can adapt gradient descent for constrained minimization to

minimize a closed convex function f(x), subject to the additional
requirement that x K, where K is a closed convex body. A body K
n is convex if for all x, y K, the convex combination x+(1)y K
for all 0 1. A closed convex body contains its limit points.

Somewhat surprisingly, restricting to the constrained problem does not
significantly increase the number of iterations of gradient descent. The

idea is that you run the same algorithm, but in each iteration, check

whether the current point x(t) is still within the convex body K. If it is
not, just move to the closest point in K. Moving to the closest point is
known as projection. We formally define the projection K(x) of a point
x in n dimensions onto a convex body K as the point y K such that x
y = min {x z : z K}. If we have x K, then K(x) = x.

This one change yields the procedure GRADIENT-DESCENT-

CONSTRAINED, in which line 4 of GRADIENT-DESCENT is

replaced by two lines. It assumes that x(0) K. Line 4 of GRADIENT-

DESCENT-CONSTRAINED moves in the direction of the negative

gradient, and line 5 projects back onto K. The lemma that follows helps
to show that when x* K, if the projection step in line 5 moves from a
point outside of K to a point in K, it cannot be moving away from x*.

GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED(f, x(0), , T, K)

1 sum = 0 // n-dimensional vector, initially all 0

2 for t = 0 to T 1

3 sum = sum + x(t) // add each of n dimensions into sum

4 x(t+1) = x(t) · (f)(x(t))// (f)(x(t)), x(t+1) are n-

5 x(t+1) = K(x(t+1)) dimensional
6 x-avg = sum/T
// project onto K

// divide each of n dimensions by T

7 return x-avg

Lemma 33.10
Consider a convex body K n and points a K and b n. Let b =
K(b). Then b a2 b a2.

Proof If b K, then b = b and the claim is true. Otherwise, b b, and

as Figure 33.6 shows, we can extend the line segment between b and b
to a line . Let c be the projection of a onto . Point c may or may not be

in K, and if a is on the boundary of K, then c could coincide with b. If c

coincides with b (part (c) of the figure), then abb is a right triangle, and
so b a2 b a2. If c does not coincide with b (parts (a) and (b)
of the figure), then because of convexity, the angle abb must be
obtuse. Because angle abb is obtuse, b lies between c and b on .
Furthermore, because c is the projection of a onto line , acb and acb
must be right triangles. By the Pythagorean theorem, we have that b
a2 = a c2+c b2 and b a2 = a c2+c b2. Subtracting
these two equations gives b a2 b a2 = c b2 c b2.
Because b is between c and b, we must have c b2 c b2, and
thus b a2 b a2 0. The lemma follows.

Figure 33.6 Projecting a point b outside the convex body K to the closest point b = K(b) in
K. Line is the line containing b and b, and point c is the projection of a onto . (a) When c is
in K. (b) When c is not in K. (c) When a is on the boundary of K and c coincides with b.

We can now repeat the entire proof for the unconstrained case and

obtain the same bounds. Lemma 33.10 with a = x*, b = x(t+1), and b =
x(t+1) tells us that x(t+1)x*2 x(t+1)x*2. We can therefore

derive an upper bound that matches inequality (33.31). We continue to

define (t) as in equation (33.26), but noting that x(t+1), computed in

line 5 of GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED, has a different
meaning here from in inequality (33.31):

With the same upper bound on the change in the potential function as
in equation (33.30), the entire proof of Lemma 33.9 can proceed as
before. We can therefore conclude that the procedure GRADIENTDESCENT-CONSTRAINED has the same asymptotic complexity as
GRADIENT-DESCENT. We summarize this result in the following
theorem.

Theorem 33.11

Let K n be a convex body, x* n be the minimizer of a convex

function f over K, and , where R and L are defined in

equations (33.20) and (33.21). Suppose that the vector x-avg is returned

by an execution of GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED(f, x(0),

, T, K). Let . Then we have f(x-avg) f(x*) .

Applications of gradient descent

Gradient descent has many applications to minimizing functions and is
widely used in optimization and machine learning. Here we sketch how
it can be used to solve linear systems. Then we discuss an application to
machine learning: prediction using linear regression.

In Chapter 28, we saw how to use Gaussian elimination to solve a

system of linear equations Ax = b, thereby computing x = A-1b. If A is
an n × n matrix and b is a length-n vector, then the running time of

Gaussian elimination is (n3), which for large matrices might be

prohibitively expensive. If an approximate solution is acceptable,

however, you can use gradient descent.

First, let's see how to use gradient descent as a roundabout--and

admittedly inefficient--way to solve for x in the scalar equation ax = b,

where a, x, b . This equation is equivalent to ax b = 0. If ax b is

the derivative of a convex function f(x), then ax b = 0 for the value of

x that minimizes f(x). Given f(x), gradient descent can then determine

this minimizer. Of course, f(x) is just the integral of ax b, that is,

, which is convex if a 0. Therefore, one way to solve ax

= b for a 0 is to find the minimizer for via gradient descent.

We now generalize this idea to higher dimensions, where using

gradient descent may actually lead to a faster algorithm. One n-

dimensional analog is the function , where A is an n ×

n matrix. The gradient of f with respect to x is the function Ax b. To

find the value of x that minimizes f, we set the gradient of f to 0 and

solve for x. Solving Axb = 0 for x, we obtain x = A-1b, Thus,

minimizing f(x) is equivalent to solving Ax = b. If f(x) is convex, then

gradient descent can approximately compute this minimum.

A 1-dimensional function is convex when its second derivative is

positive. The equivalent definition for a multidimensional function is

that it is convex when its Hessian matrix is positive-semidefinite (see

page 1222 for a definition), where the Hessian matrix (2f)(x) of a

function f(x) is the matrix in which entry (i, j) is the partial derivative of

f with respect to i and j:

Analogous to the 1-dimensional case, the Hessian of f is just A, and so
if A is a positive-semidefinite matrix, then we can use gradient descent

to find a point x where Ax b. If R and L are not too large, then this

method is faster than using Gaussian elimination.

Gradient descent in machine learning

As a concrete example of supervised learning for prediction, suppose
that you want to predict whether a patient will develop heart disease.

For each of m patients, you have n different attributes. For example, you
might have n = 4 and the four pieces of data are age, height, blood

pressure, and number of close family members with heart disease.

Denote the data for patient i as a vector x(i) n, with giving the
jth entry in vector x(i). The label of patient i is denoted by a scalar y(i)

, signifying the severity of the patient's heart disease. The hypothesis

should capture a relationship between the x(i) values and y(i). For this

example, we make the modeling assumption that the relationship is
linear, and therefore the goal is to compute the "best" linear

relationship between the x(i) values and y(i): a linear function f : n
such that f(x(i)) y(i) for each patient i. Of course, no such function

may exist, but you would like one that comes as close as possible. A

linear function f can be defined by a vector of weights w = (w0, w1, ...,
wn), with

When evaluating a machine-learning model, you need to measure

how close each value f(x(i)) is to its corresponding label y(i). In this
example, we define the error e(i) associated with patient i as e(i) =
f(x(i)) y(i). The objective function we choose is to minimize the sum of

squares of the errors, which is

The objective function is typically called the loss function, and the
least-squares error given by equation (33.33) is just one example of
many possible loss functions. The goal is then, given the x(i) and y(i)
values, to compute the weights w0, w1, ..., wn so as to minimize the loss
function in equation (33.33). The variables here are the weights w0, w1,
..., wn and not the x(i) or y(i) values.

This particular objective is sometimes known as a least-squares fit,

and the problem of finding a linear function to fit data and minimize the

least-squares error is called linear regression. Finding a least-squares fit

is also addressed in Section 28.3.

When the function f is linear, the loss function defined in equation

(33.33) is convex, because it is the sum of squares of linear functions,

which are themselves convex. Therefore, we can apply gradient descent

to compute a set of weights to approximately minimize the least-squares

error. The concrete goal of learning is to be able to make predictions on

new data. Informally, if the features are all reported in the same units

and are from the same range (perhaps from being normalized), then the

weights tend to have a natural interpretation because the features of the

data that are better predictors of the label have a larger associated

weight. For example, you would expect that, after normalization, the

weight associated with the number of family members with heart

disease would be larger than the weight associated with height.

The computed weights form a model of the data. Once you have a

model, you can make predictions, so that given new data, you can

predict its label. In our example, given a new patient x who is not part

of the original training data set, you would still hope to predict the

chance that the new patient develops heart disease. You can do so by

computing the label f(x), incorporating the weights computed by

gradient descent.

For this linear-regression problem, the objective is to minimize the

expression in equation (33.33), which is a quadratic in each of the n+1
weights wj. Thus, entry j in the gradient is linear in wj. Exercise 33.3-5

asks you to explicitly compute the gradient and see that it can be

computed in O(nm) time, which is linear in the input size. Compared

with the exact method of solving equation (33.33) in Chapter 28, which

needs to invert a matrix, gradient descent is typically much faster.

Section 33.1 briefly discussed regularization--the idea that a

complicated hypothesis should be penalized in order to avoid overfitting

the training data. Regularization often involves adding a term to the

objective function, but it can also be achieved by adding a constraint.

One way to regularize this example would be to explicitly limit the norm

of the weights, adding a constraint that w B for some bound B > 0.

(Recall again that the components of the vector w are the variables in

the present application.) Adding this constraint controls the complexity

of the model, as the number of values wj that can have large absolute

value is now limited.

In order to run GRADIENT-DESCENT-CONSTRAINED for any

problem, you need to implement the projection step, as well as to

compute bounds on R and L. We conclude this section by describing
these calculations for gradient descent with the constraint w B.

First, consider the projection step in line 5. Suppose that the update in

line 4 results in a vector w. The projection is implemented by

computing k(w) where K is defined by w B. This particular

projection can be accomplished by simply scaling w, since we know that

closest point in K to w must be the point along the vector whose norm
is exactly B. The amount z by which we need to scale w to hit the
boundary of K is the solution to the equation z w = B, which is
solved by z = B/w. Hence line 5 is implemented by computing w =
wB/w. Because we always have w B, Exercise 33.3-6 asks you to
show that the upper bound on the magnitude L of the gradient is O(B).
We also get a bound on R, as follows. By the constraint w B, we

know that both w(0) B and w* B, and thus w(0) w* 2B.
Using the definition of R in equation (33.20), we have R = O(B). The

bound on the accuracy of the solution after T iterations in

Theorem 33.11 becomes .

Exercises

33.3-1

Prove Lemma 33.6. Start from the definition of a convex function given

in equation (33.18). (Hint: You can prove the statement when n = 1 first.
The proof for general values of n is similar.)

33.3-2

Prove Lemma 33.7.

33.3-3
Prove equation (33.29). (Hint: The proof for n = 1 dimension is
straightforward. The proof for general values of n dimensions follows

along similar lines.)

33.3-4
Show that the function f in equation (33.32) is a convex function of the
variables w0, w1, ..., wn.

33.3-5

Compute the gradient of expression (33.33) and explain how to evaluate

the gradient in O(nm) time.

33.3-6
Consider the function f defined in equation (33.32), and suppose that
you have a bound w B, as is considered in the discussion on
regularization. Show that L = O(B) in this case.

33.3-7

Equation (33.2) on page 1009 gives a function that, when minimized,

gives an optimal solution to the k-means problem. Explain how to use
gradient descent to solve the k-means problem.

Problems

33-1 Newton's method

Gradient descent iteratively moves closer to a desired value (the
minimum) of a function. Another algorithm in this spirit is known as

Newton's method, which is an iterative algorithm that finds the root of a
function. Here, we consider Newton's method which, given a function f :
, finds a value x* such that f(x* ) = 0. The algorithm moves
through a series of points x(0), x(1), .... If the algorithm is currently at
a point x(t), then to find point x(t+1), it first takes the equation of the
line tangent to the curve at x = x(t),
y = f(x(t))(x x(t)) + f(x(t)).
It then uses the x-intercept of this line as the next point x(t+1).
a. Show that the algorithm described above can be summarized by the

update rule

We restrict our attention to some domain I and assume that f(x) 0 for
all x I and that f(x) is continuous. We also assume that the starting
point x(0) is sufficiently close to x*, where "sufficiently close" means
that we can use only the first two terms of the Taylor expansion of f(x*)
about x(0), namely

where (0) is some value between x(0) and x*. If the approximation in
equation (33.34) holds for x(0), it also holds for any point closer to x*.
b. Assume that the function f has exactly one point x* for which f(x*) =

0. Let (t) = |x(t) x*|. Using the Taylor expansion in equation

(33.34), show that

where (t) is some value between x(t) and x*.
c. If

for some constant c and (0) < 1, then we say that the function f has
quadratic convergence, since the error decreases quadratically.
Assuming that f has quadratic convergence, how many iterations are
needed to find a root of f(x) to an accuracy of ? Your answer should

include .

d. Suppose you wish to find a root of the function f(x) = (x 3)2, which
is also the minimizer, and you start at x(0) = 3.5. Compare the number

of iterations needed by gradient descent to find the minimizer and
Newton's method to find the root.

33-2 Hedge

Another variant in the multiplicative-weights framework is known as

HEDGE. It differs from WEIGHTED MAJORITY in two ways. First,

HEDGE makes the prediction randomly--in iteration t, it assigns a

probability to expert Ei, where . It then

chooses an expert Ei according to this probability distribution and

predicts according to Ei. Second, the update rule is different. If an

expert makes a mistake, line 16 updates that expert's weight by the rule

, for some 0 < < 1. Show that the expected number of

mistakes made by HEDGE, running for T rounds, is at most m* + (ln
n)/ + T.

33-3 Nonoptimality of Lloyd's procedure in one dimension

Give an example to show that even in one dimension, Lloyd's procedure
for finding clusters does not always return an optimum result. That is,

Lloyd's procedure may terminate and return as a result a set C of

clusters that does not minimize f(S, C), even when S is a set of points

on a line.

33-4 Stochastic gradient descent
Consider the problem described in Section 33.3 of fitting a line f(x) = ax
+ b to a given set of point/value pairs S = {(x1, y1), ..., (xT, yT)} by
optimizing the choice of the parameters a and b using gradient descent
to find a best least-squares fit. Here we consider the case where x is a

real-valued variable, rather than a vector.

Suppose that you are not given the point/value pairs in S all at once,

but only one at a time in an online manner. Furthermore, the points are

given in random order. That is, you know that there are n points, but in
iteration t you are given only (xi, yi) where i is independently and
randomly chosen from {1, ..., T}.

You can use gradient descent to compute an estimate to the

function. As each point (xi, yi) is considered, you can update the
current values of a and b by taking the derivative with respect to a and
b of the term of the objective function depending on (xi, yi). Doing so

gives you a stochastic estimate of the gradient, and you can then take a
small step in the opposite direction.

Give pseudcode to implement this variant of gradient descent. What

would the expected value of the error be as a function of T, L, and R?
(Hint: Replicate the analysis of GRADIENT-DESCENT in Section

33.3 for this variant.)

This procedure and its variants are known as stochastic gradient
descent.

Chapter notes

For a general introduction to artificial intelligence, we recommend
Russell and Norvig [391]. For a general introduction to machine
learning, we recommend Murphy [340].

Lloyd's procedure for the k-means problem was first proposed by

Lloyd [304] and also later by Forgy [151]. It is sometimes called "Lloyd's

algorithm" or the "Lloyd-Forgy algorithm." Although Mahajan et al.
[310] showed that finding an optimal clustering is NP-hard, even in the
plane, Kanungo et al. [241] have shown that there is an approximation

algorithm for the k-means problem with approximation ratio 9 + , for

any > 0.
The multiplicative-weights method is surveyed by Arora, Hazan, and

Kale [25]. The main idea of updating weights based on feedback has
been rediscovered many times. One early use is in game theory, where
Brown defined "Fictitious Play" [74] and conjectured its convergence to
the value of a zero-sum game. The convergence properties were
established by Robinson [382].

In machine learning, the first use of multiplicative weights was by
Littlestone in the Winnow algorithm [300], which was later extended by
Littlestone and Warmuth to the weighted-majority algorithm described
in Section 33.2 [301]. This work is closely connected to the boosting
algorithm, originally due to Freund and Shapire [159]. The
multiplicative-weights idea is also closely related to several more general
optimization algorithms, including the perceptron algorithm [328] and
algorithms for optimization problems such as packing linear programs
[177, 359].

The treatment of gradient descent in this chapter draws heavily on
the unpublished manuscript of Bansal and Gupta [35]. They emphasize
the idea of using a potential function and using ideas from amortized
analysis to explain gradient descent. Other presentations and analyses
of gradient descent include works by Bubeck [75], Boyd and
Vanderberghe [69], and Nesterov [343].

Gradient descent is known to converge faster when functions obey

stronger properties than general convexity. For example, a function f is
-strongly convex if f(y) f(x) + (f)(x), (y x) + y x for all x, y
n. In this case, GRADIENT-DESCENT can use a variable step size
and return x(T). The step size at step t becomes t = 1/((t + 1)), and
the procedure returns a point such that f(x-avg) f(x*) L2/((T + 1)).

This convergence is better than that of Theorem 33.8 because the
number of iterations needed is linear, rather than quadratic, in the

desired error parameter , and because the performance is independent
of the initial point.

Another case in which gradient descent can be shown to perform
better than the analysis in Section 33.3 suggests is for smooth convex

functions. We say that a function is -smooth if

. This inequality goes in the

opposite direction from the one for -strong convexity. Better bounds

on gradient descent are possible here as well.

1 Although the curve in Figure 33.4 looks concave, according to the definition of convexity

that we'll see below, the function f in the figure is convex.
2 A function f : n is closed if, for each , the set {x dom(f) : f(x) } is closed,
where dom(f) is the domain of f.

34 NP-Completeness

Almost all the algorithms we have studied thus far have been

polynomial-time algorithms: on inputs of size n, their worst-case running
time is O(nk) for some constant k. You might wonder whether all

problems can be solved in polynomial time. The answer is no. For
example, there are problems, such as Turing's famous "Halting
Problem," that cannot be solved by any computer, no matter how long
you're willing to wait for an answer.1 There are also problems that can

be solved, but not in O(nk) time for any constant k. Generally, we think

of problems that are solvable by polynomial-time algorithms as being
tractable, or "easy," and problems that require superpolynomial time as
being intractable, or "hard."

The subject of this chapter, however, is an interesting class of
problems, called the "NP-complete" problems, whose status is
unknown. No polynomial-time algorithm has yet been discovered for an
NP-complete problem, nor has anyone yet been able to prove that no
polynomial-time algorithm can exist for any one of them. This so-called
P NP question has been one of the deepest, most perplexing open
research problems in theoretical computer science since it was first
posed in 1971.

Several NP-complete problems are particularly tantalizing because
they seem on the surface to be similar to problems that we know how to
solve in polynomial time. In each of the following pairs of problems, one
is solvable in polynomial time and the other is NP-complete, but the
difference between the problems appears to be slight:

Shortest versus longest simple paths: In Chapter 22, we saw that even

with negative edge weights, we can find shortest paths from a single
source in a directed graph G = (V, E) in O(VE) time. Finding a longest

simple path between two vertices is difficult, however. Merely
determining whether a graph contains a simple path with at least a
given number of edges is NP-complete.

Euler tour versus hamiltonian cycle: An Euler tour of a strongly
connected, directed graph G = (V, E) is a cycle that traverses each
edge of G exactly once, although it is allowed to visit each vertex more

than once. Problem 20-3 on page 583 asks you to show how to
determine whether a strongly connected, directed graph has an Euler

tour and, if it does, the order of the edges in the Euler tour, all in O(E)
time. A hamiltonian cycle of a directed graph G = (V, E) is a simple
cycle that contains each vertex in V. Determining whether a directed

graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete. (Later in this chapter,

we'll prove that determining whether an undirected graph has a

hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete.)

2-CNF satisfiability versus 3-CNF satisfiability: Boolean formulas
contain binary variables whose values are 0 or 1; boolean connectives
such as (AND), (OR), and ¬ (NOT); and parentheses. A boolean

formula is satisfiable if there exists some assignment of the values 0

and 1 to its variables that causes it to evaluate to 1. We'll define terms
more formally later in this chapter, but informally, a boolean formula

is in k-conjunctive normal form, or k-CNF if it is the AND of clauses
of ORs of exactly k variables or their negations. For example, the
boolean formula (x1 x2) (¬x1 x3) (¬x2 ¬x3) is in 2-CNF
(with satisfying assignment x1 = 1, x2 = 0, and x3 = 1). Although

there is a polynomial-time algorithm to determine whether a 2-CNF
formula is satisfiable, we'll see later in this chapter that determining
whether a 3-CNF formula is satisfiable is NP-complete.

NP-completeness and the classes P and NP

Throughout this chapter, we refer to three classes of problems: P, NP,
and NPC, the latter class being the NP-complete problems. We describe
them informally here, with formal definitions to appear later on.

The class P consists of those problems that are solvable in
polynomial time. More specifically, they are problems that can be solved

in O(nk) time for some constant k, where n is the size of the input to the

problem. Most of the problems examined in previous chapters belong
to P.

The class NP consists of those problems that are "verifiable" in
polynomial time. What do we mean by a problem being verifiable? If
you were somehow given a "certificate" of a solution, then you could
verify that the certificate is correct in time polynomial in the size of the
input to the problem. For example, in the hamiltonian-cycle problem,

given a directed graph G = (V, E), a certificate would be a sequence v1,
v2, v3, ..., v|V| of |V| vertices. You could check in polynomial time that
the sequence contains each of the |V| vertices exactly once, that (vi,
vi+1) E for i = 1, 2, 3, ..., |V| - 1, and that (v|V|, v1) E. As another

example, for 3-CNF satisfiability, a certificate could be an assignment of
values to variables. You could check in polynomial time that this
assignment satisfies the boolean formula.

Any problem in P also belongs to NP, since if a problem belongs to P
then it is solvable in polynomial time without even being supplied a
certificate. We'll formalize this notion later in this chapter, but for now
you can believe that P NP. The famous open question is whether P is
a proper subset of NP.

Informally, a problem belongs to the class NPC--and we call it NPcomplete--if it belongs to NP and is as "hard" as any problem in NP.

We'll formally define what it means to be as hard as any problem in NP

later in this chapter. In the meantime, we state without proof that if any
NP-complete problem can be solved in polynomial time, then every

problem in NP has a polynomial-time algorithm. Most theoretical
computer scientists believe that the NP-complete problems are
intractable, since given the wide range of NP-complete problems that
have been studied to date--without anyone having discovered a

polynomial-time solution to any of them--it would be truly astounding
if all of them could be solved in polynomial time. Yet, given the effort
devoted thus far to proving that NP-complete problems are intractable
--without a conclusive outcome--we cannot rule out the possibility
that the NP-complete problems could turn out to be solvable in
polynomial time.

To become a good algorithm designer, you must understand the
rudiments of the theory of NP-completeness. If you can establish a
problem as NP-complete, you provide good evidence for its
intractability. As an engineer, you would then do better to spend your
time developing an approximation algorithm (see Chapter 35) or solving
a tractable special case, rather than searching for a fast algorithm that
solves the problem exactly. Moreover, many natural and interesting
problems that on the surface seem no harder than sorting, graph
searching, or network flow are in fact NP-complete. Therefore, you
should become familiar with this remarkable class of problems.

Overview of showing problems to be NP-complete

The techniques used to show that a particular problem is NP-complete
differ fundamentally from the techniques used throughout most of this
book to design and analyze algorithms. If you can demonstrate that a
problem is NP-complete, you are making a statement about how hard it
is (or at least how hard we think it is), rather than about how easy it is.
If you prove a problem NP-complete, you are saying that searching for
efficient algorithm is likely to be a fruitless endeavor. In this way, NPcompleteness proofs bear some similarity to the proof in Section 8.1 of

an (n lg n)-time lower bound for any comparison sort algorithm,

although the specific techniques used for showing NP-completeness
differ from the decision-tree method used in Section 8.1.

We rely on three key concepts in showing a problem to be NPcomplete:

Decision problems versus optimization problems

Many problems of interest are optimization problems, in which each

feasible (i.e., "legal") solution has an associated value, and the goal is to

find a feasible solution with the best value. For example, in a problem

that we call SHORTEST-PATH, the input is an undirected graph G and
vertices u and v, and the goal is to find a path from u to v that uses the

fewest edges. In other words, SHORTEST-PATH is the single-pair
shortest-path problem in an unweighted, undirected graph. NPcompleteness applies directly not to optimization problems, however,

but to decision problems, in which the answer is simply "yes" or "no"

(or, more formally, "1" or "0").
Although NP-complete problems are confined to the realm of

decision problems, there is usually a way to cast a given optimization
problem as a related decision problem by imposing a bound on the
value to be optimized. For example, a decision problem related to

SHORTEST-PATH is PATH: given an undirected graph G, vertices u
and v, and an integer k, does a path exist from u to v consisting of at
most k edges?

The relationship between an optimization problem and its related
decision problem works in your favor when you try to show that the
optimization problem is "hard." That is because the decision problem is
in a sense "easier," or at least "no harder." As a specific example, you
can solve PATH by solving SHORTEST-PATH and then comparing the
number of edges in the shortest path found to the value of the decision-

problem parameter k. In other words, if an optimization problem is

easy, its related decision problem is easy as well. Stated in a way that has
more relevance to NP-completeness, if you can provide evidence that a
decision problem is hard, you also provide evidence that its related
optimization problem is hard. Thus, even though it restricts attention to
decision problems, the theory of NP-completeness often has
implications for optimization problems as well.

Reductions

The above notion of showing that one problem is no harder or no easier
than another applies even when both problems are decision problems.
Almost every NP-completeness proof takes advantage of this idea, as

follows. Consider a decision problem A, which you would like to solve in
polynomial time. We call the input to a particular problem an instance

of that problem. For example, in PATH, an instance is a particular

graph G, particular vertices u and v of G, and a particular integer k.

Now suppose that you already know how to solve a different decision

problem B in polynomial time. Finally, suppose that you have a
procedure that transforms any instance of A into some instance of B

with the following characteristics:

Figure 34.1 How to use a polynomial-time reduction algorithm to solve a decision problem A
in polynomial time, given a polynomial-time decision algorithm for another problem B. In
polynomial time, transform an instance of A into an instance of B, solve B in polynomial

time, and use the answer for as the answer for .

The transformation takes polynomial time.
The answers are the same. That is, the answer for is "yes" if and
only if the answer for is also "yes."

We call such a procedure a polynomial-time reduction algorithm and, as
Figure 34.1 shows, it provides us a way to solve problem A in

polynomial time:

1. Given an instance of problem A, use a polynomial-time

reduction algorithm to transform it to an instance of problem

B.
2. Run the polynomial-time decision algorithm for B on the

instance .
3. Use the answer for as the answer for .

As long as each of these steps takes polynomial time, all three together
do also, and so you have a way to decide on in polynomial time. In

other words, by "reducing" solving problem A to solving problem B,
you use the "easiness" of B to prove the "easiness" of A.

Recalling that NP-completeness is about showing how hard a
problem is rather than how easy it is, you use polynomial-time
reductions in the opposite way to show that a problem is NP-complete.
Let's take the idea a step further and show how you can use polynomialtime reductions to show that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist for

a particular problem B. Suppose that you have a decision problem A for

which you already know that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist.

(Ignore for the moment how to find such a problem A.) Suppose further
that you have a polynomial-time reduction transforming instances of A
to instances of B. Now you can use a simple proof by contradiction to
show that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist for B. Suppose
otherwise, that is, suppose that B has a polynomial-time algorithm.

Then, using the method shown in Figure 34.1, you would have a way to

solve problem A in polynomial time, which contradicts the assumption
that there is no polynomial-time algorithm for A.

To prove that a problem B is NP-complete, the methodology is

similar. Although you cannot assume that there is absolutely no

polynomial-time algorithm for problem A, you prove that problem B is
NP-complete on the assumption that problem A is also NP-complete.

A first NP-complete problem

Because the technique of reduction relies on having a problem already
known to be NP-complete in order to prove a different problem NPcomplete, there must be some "first" NP-complete problem. We'll use
the circuit-satisfiability problem, in which the input is a boolean
combinational circuit composed of AND, OR, and NOT gates, and the
question is whether there exists some set of boolean inputs to this
circuit that causes its output to be 1. Section 34.3 will prove that this
first problem is NP-complete.

Chapter outline

This chapter studies the aspects of NP-completeness that bear most
directly on the analysis of algorithms. Section 34.1 formalizes the
notion of "problem" and defines the complexity class P of polynomialtime solvable decision problems. We'll also see how these notions fit into

the framework of formal-language theory. Section 34.2 defines the class
NP of decision problems whose solutions are verifiable in polynomial
time. It also formally poses the P NP question.

Section 34.3 shows how to relate problems via polynomial-time
"reductions." It defines NP-completeness and sketches a proof that the
circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete. With one problem proven
NP-complete, Section 34.4 demonstrates how to prove other problems
to be NP-complete much more simply by the methodology of
reductions. To illustrate this methodology, the section shows that two
formula-satisfiability problems are NP-complete. Section 34.5 proves a
variety of other problems to be NP-complete by using reductions. You
will probably find several of these reductions to be quite creative,
because they convert a problem in one domain to a problem in a
completely different domain.