34.1 Polynomial time

Since NP-completeness relies on notions of solving a problem and
verifying a certificate in polynomial time, let's first examine what it
means for a problem to be solvable in polynomial time.

Recall that we generally regard problems that have polynomial-time
solutions as tractable. Here are three reasons why:

1. Although no reasonable person considers a problem that

requires (n100) time to be tractable, few practical problems

require time on the order of such a high-degree polynomial. The
polynomial-time computable problems encountered in practice
typically require much less time. Experience has shown that once
the first polynomial-time algorithm for a problem has been
discovered, more efficient algorithms often follow. Even if the
current best algorithm for a problem has a running time of

(n100), an algorithm with a much better running time will likely

soon be discovered.

2. For many reasonable models of computation, a problem that can
be solved in polynomial time in one model can be solved in

polynomial time in another. For example, the class of problems
solvable in polynomial time by the serial random-access machine
used throughout most of this book is the same as the class of
problems solvable in polynomial time on abstract Turing
machines.2 It is also the same as the class of problems solvable
in polynomial time on a parallel computer when the number of
processors grows polynomially with the input size.

3. The class of polynomial-time solvable problems has nice closure
properties, since polynomials are closed under addition,
multiplication, and composition. For example, if the output of
one polynomial-time algorithm is fed into the input of another,
the composite algorithm is polynomial. Exercise 34.1-5 asks you
to show that if an algorithm makes a constant number of calls to
polynomial-time subroutines and performs an additional
amount of work that also takes polynomial time, then the
running time of the composite algorithm is polynomial.

Abstract problems

To understand the class of polynomial-time solvable problems, you
must first have a formal notion of what a "problem" is. We define an

abstract problem Q to be a binary relation on a set I of problem
instances and a set S of problem solutions. For example, an instance for

SHORTEST-PATH is a triple consisting of a graph and two vertices. A
solution is a sequence of vertices in the graph, with perhaps the empty
sequence denoting that no path exists. The problem SHORTEST-PATH
itself is the relation that associates each instance of a graph and two
vertices with a shortest path in the graph that connects the two vertices.
Since shortest paths are not necessarily unique, a given problem
instance may have more than one solution.

This formulation of an abstract problem is more general than
necessary for our purposes. As we saw above, the theory of NP-

completeness restricts attention to decision problems: those having a

yes/no solution. In this case, we can view an abstract decision problem

as a function that maps the instance set I to the solution set {0, 1}. For

example, a decision problem related to SHORTEST-PATH is the

problem PATH that we saw earlier. If i = G, u, v, k is an instance of
PATH, then PATH(i) = 1 (yes) if G contains a path from u to v with at
most k edges, and PATH(i) = 0 (no) otherwise. Many abstract problems
are not decision problems, but rather optimization problems, which

require some value to be minimized or maximized. As we saw above,
however, you can usually recast an optimization problem as a decision
problem that is no harder.

Encodings

In order for a computer program to solve an abstract problem, its
problem instances must appear in a way that the program understands.

An encoding of a set S of abstract objects is a mapping e from S to the

set of binary strings.3 For example, we are all familiar with encoding the
natural numbers = {0, 1, 2, 3, 4,...} as the strings {0, 1, 10, 11, 100,

...}. Using this encoding, e(17) = 10001. If you have looked at computer

representations of keyboard characters, you probably have seen the
ASCII code, where, for example, the encoding of A is 01000001. You can
encode a compound object as a binary string by combining the
representations of its constituent parts. Polygons, graphs, functions,
ordered pairs, programs--all can be encoded as binary strings.

Thus, a computer algorithm that "solves" some abstract decision
problem actually takes an encoding of a problem instance as input. The

size of an instance i is just the length of its string, which we denote by
|i|. We call a problem whose instance set is the set of binary strings a
concrete problem. We say that an algorithm solves a concrete problem in
O(T (n)) time if, when it is provided a problem instance i of length n = |i|,
the algorithm can produce the solution in O(T (n)) time.4 A concrete
problem is polynomial-time solvable, therefore, if there exists an
algorithm to solve it in O(nk) time for some constant k.

We can now formally define the complexity class P as the set of

concrete decision problems that are polynomial-time solvable.
Encodings map abstract problems to concrete problems. Given an

abstract decision problem Q mapping an instance set I to {0, 1}, an

encoding e : I {0, 1}* can induce a related concrete decision problem,
which we denote by e(Q).5 If the solution to an abstract-problem
instance i I is Q(i) {0, 1}, then the solution to the concrete-problem
instance e(i) {0, 1}* is also Q(i). As a technicality, some binary strings

might represent no meaningful abstract-problem instance. For
convenience, assume that any such string maps arbitrarily to 0. Thus,
the concrete problem produces the same solutions as the abstract
problem on binary-string instances that represent the encodings of
abstract-problem instances.

We would like to extend the definition of polynomial-time solvability
from concrete problems to abstract problems by using encodings as the
bridge, ideally with the definition independent of any particular
encoding. That is, the efficiency of solving a problem should not depend
on how the problem is encoded. Unfortunately, it depends quite heavily
on the encoding. For example, suppose that the sole input to an

algorithm is an integer k, and suppose that the running time of the
algorithm is (k). If the integer k is provided in unary--a string of k 1s
--then the running time of the algorithm is O(n) on length-n inputs,
which is polynomial time. If the input k is provided using the more
natural binary representation, however, then the input length is n = lg
k + 1, so the size of the unary encoding is exponential in the size of the

binary encoding. With the binary representation, the running time of

the algorithm is (k) = (2n), which is exponential in the size of the

input. Thus, depending on the encoding, the algorithm runs in either
polynomial or superpolynomial time.

The encoding of an abstract problem matters quite a bit to how we
understand polynomial time. We cannot really talk about solving an
abstract problem without first specifying an encoding. Nevertheless, in
practice, if we rule out "expensive" encodings such as unary ones, the
actual encoding of a problem makes little difference to whether the
problem can be solved in polynomial time. For example, representing
integers in base 3 instead of binary has no effect on whether a problem
is solvable in polynomial time, since we can convert an integer

represented in base 3 to an integer represented in base 2 in polynomial

time.

We say that a function f : {0, 1}* {0, 1}* is polynomial-time
computable if there exists a polynomial-time algorithm A that, given any
input x {0, 1}*, produces as output f (x). For some set I of problem
instances, we say that two encodings e1 and e2 are polynomially related
if there exist two polynomial-time computable functions f12 and f21

such that for any i I, we have f12(e1(i)) = e2(i) and f21(e2(i)) = e1(i).6
That is, a polynomial-time algorithm can compute the encoding e2(i)
from the encoding e1(i), and vice versa. If two encodings e1 and e2 of

an abstract problem are polynomially related, whether the problem is

polynomial-time solvable or not is independent of which encoding we

use, as the following lemma shows.

Lemma 34.1
Let Q be an abstract decision problem on an instance set I, and let e1
and e2 be polynomially related encodings on I. Then, e1(Q) P if and
only if e2(Q) P.

Proof We need only prove the forward direction, since the backward
direction is symmetric. Suppose, therefore, that e1(Q) can be solved in
O(nk) time for some constant k. Furthermore, suppose that for any
problem instance i, the encoding e1(i) can be computed from the
encoding e2(i) in O(nc) time for some constant c, where n = |e2(i)|. To
solve problem e2(Q) on input e2(i), first compute e1(i) and then run the
algorithm for e1(Q) on e1(i). How long does this procedure take?
Converting encodings takes O(nc) time, and therefore |e1(i)| = O(nc),

since the output of a serial computer cannot be longer than its running

time. Solving the problem on e1(i) takes O(|e1(i)|k) = O(nck) time, which
is polynomial since both c and k are constants.

Thus, whether an abstract problem has its instances encoded in
binary or base 3 does not affect its "complexity," that is, whether it is
polynomial-time solvable or not. If instances are encoded in unary,
however, its complexity may change. In order to be able to converse in
an encoding-independent fashion, we generally assume that problem
instances are encoded in any reasonable, concise fashion, unless we
specifically say otherwise. To be precise, we assume that the encoding of
an integer is polynomially related to its binary representation, and that
the encoding of a finite set is polynomially related to its encoding as a
list of its elements, enclosed in braces and separated by commas.
(ASCII is one such encoding scheme.) With such a "standard"
encoding in hand, we can derive reasonable encodings of other
mathematical objects, such as tuples, graphs, and formulas. To denote
the standard encoding of an object, we enclose the object in angle

brackets. Thus, G denotes the standard encoding of a graph G.

As long as the encoding implicitly used is polynomially related to this
standard encoding, we can talk directly about abstract problems
without reference to any particular encoding, knowing that the choice
of encoding has no effect on whether the abstract problem is
polynomial-time solvable. From now on, we will generally assume that
all problem instances are binary strings encoded using the standard
encoding, unless we explicitly specify the contrary. We'll also typically
neglect the distinction between abstract and concrete problems. You
should watch out for problems that arise in practice, however, in which
a standard encoding is not obvious and the encoding does make a
difference.

A formal-language framework

By focusing on decision problems, we can take advantage of the
machinery of formal-language theory. Let's review some definitions

from that theory. An alphabet is a finite set of symbols. A language L

over is any set of strings made up of symbols from . For example, if

= {0, 1}, the set L = {10, 11, 101, 111, 1011, 1101, 10001,...} is the

language of binary representations of prime numbers. We denote the

empty string by , the empty language by Ø, and the language of all

strings over by *. For example, if = {0, 1}, then * = {, 0, 1, 00,

01, 10, 11, 000,...} is the set of all binary strings. Every language L over

is a subset of *.
Languages support a variety of operations. Set-theoretic operations,

such as union and intersection, follow directly from the set-theoretic
definitions. We define the complement of a language L by L = * - L.
The concatenation L1L2 of two languages L1 and L2 is the language

L = {x1x2 : x1 L1 and x2 L2}.

The closure or Kleene star of a language L is the language

L* = {} L L2 L3 ...,

where Lk is the language obtained by concatenating L to itself k times.

From the point of view of language theory, the set of instances for

any decision problem Q is simply the set *, where = {0, 1}. Since Q is

entirely characterized by those problem instances that produce a 1 (yes)

answer, we can view Q as a language L over = {0, 1}, where

L = {x * : Q(x) = 1}.

For example, the decision problem PATH has the corresponding
language

PATH = {G, u, v, G = (V, E) is an undirected graph,
k:

u, v V,
k 0 is an integer, and
G contains a path from u to v with at most k

edges}.

(Where convenient, we'll sometimes use the same name--PATH in this
case--to refer to both a decision problem and its corresponding
language.)

The formal-language framework allows us to express concisely the
relation between decision problems and algorithms that solve them. We

say that an algorithm A accepts a string x {0, 1}* if, given input x, the

algorithm's output A(x) is 1. The language accepted by an algorithm A
is the set of strings L = {x {0, 1}* : A(x) = 1}, that is, the set of
strings that the algorithm accepts. An algorithm A rejects a string x if
A(x) = 0.

Even if language L is accepted by an algorithm A, the algorithm
does not necessarily reject a string x L provided as input to it. For
example, the algorithm might loop forever. A language L is decided by
an algorithm A if every binary string in L is accepted by A and every
binary string not in L is rejected by A. A language L is accepted in
polynomial time by an algorithm A if it is accepted by A and if in
addition there exists a constant k such that for any length-n string x
L, algorithm A accepts x in O(nk) time. A language L is decided in
polynomial time by an algorithm A if there exists a constant k such that
for any length-n string x {0, 1}*, the algorithm correctly decides
whether x L in O(nk) time. Thus, to accept a language, an algorithm
need only produce an answer when provided a string in L, but to decide

a language, it must correctly accept or reject every string in {0, 1}*.

As an example, the language PATH can be accepted in polynomial

time. One polynomial-time accepting algorithm verifies that G encodes
an undirected graph, verifies that u and v are vertices in G, uses
breadth-first search to compute a path from u to v in G with the fewest

edges, and then compares the number of edges on the path obtained

with k. If G encodes an undirected graph and the path found from u to
v has at most k edges, the algorithm outputs 1 and halts. Otherwise, the

algorithm runs forever. This algorithm does not decide PATH, however,

since it does not explicitly output 0 for instances in which a shortest

path has more than k edges. A decision algorithm for PATH must

explicitly reject binary strings that do not belong to PATH. For a

decision problem such as PATH, such a decision algorithm is

straightforward to design: instead of running forever when there is not

a path from u to v with at most k edges, it outputs 0 and halts. (It must

also output 0 and halt if the input encoding is faulty.) For other

problems, such as Turing's Halting Problem, there exists an accepting

algorithm, but no decision algorithm exists.

We can informally define a complexity class as a set of languages,
membership in which is determined by a complexity measure, such as
running time, of an algorithm that determines whether a given string x
belongs to language L. The actual definition of a complexity class is

somewhat more technical.7

Using this language-theoretic framework, we can provide an

alternative definition of the complexity class P:

P = {L {0, there exists an algorithm A that decides L in

1}*: polynomial time}.

In fact, as the following theorem shows, P is also the class of languages
that can be accepted in polynomial time.

Theorem 34.2
P = {L : L is accepted by a polynomial-time algorithm}.

Proof Because the class of languages decided by polynomial-time

algorithms is a subset of the class of languages accepted by polynomial-

time algorithms, we need only show that if L is accepted by a

polynomial-time algorithm, it is decided by a polynomial-time

algorithm. Let L be the language accepted by some polynomial-time
algorithm A. We use a classic "simulation" argument to construct
another polynomial-time algorithm A that decides L. Because A
accepts L in O(nk) time for some constant k, there also exists a
constant c such that A accepts L in at most cnk steps. For any input
string x, the algorithm A simulates cnk steps of A. After simulating cnk
steps, algorithm A inspects the behavior of A. If A has accepted x, then
A accepts x by outputting a 1. If A has not accepted x, then A rejects x
by outputting a 0. The overhead of A simulating A does not increase
the running time by more than a polynomial factor, and thus A is a
polynomial-time algorithm that decides L.

The proof of Theorem 34.2 is nonconstructive. For a given language

L P, we may not actually know a bound on the running time for the

algorithm A that accepts L. Nevertheless, we know that such a bound
exists, and therefore, that an algorithm A exists that can check the
bound, even though we may not be able to find the algorithm A easily.

Exercises

34.1-1

Define the optimization problem LONGEST-PATH-LENGTH as the
relation that associates each instance of an undirected graph and two
vertices with the number of edges in a longest simple path between the

two vertices. Define the decision problem LONGEST-PATH = {G, u, v,
k : G = (V, E) is an undirected graph, u, v V, k 0 is an integer, and
there exists a simple path from u to v in G consisting of at least k

edges}. Show that the optimization problem LONGEST-PATHLENGTH can be solved in polynomial time if and only if LONGESTPATH P.

34.1-2

Give a formal definition for the problem of finding the longest simple
cycle in an undirected graph. Give a related decision problem. Give the
language corresponding to the decision problem.

34.1-3

Give a formal encoding of directed graphs as binary strings using an
adjacency-matrix representation. Do the same using an adjacency-list
representation. Argue that the two representations are polynomially
related.

34.1-4

Is the dynamic-programming algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem
that is asked for in Exercise 15.2-2 a polynomial-time algorithm?
Explain your answer.

34.1-5

Show that if an algorithm makes at most a constant number of calls to
polynomial-time subroutines and performs an additional amount of
work that also takes polynomial time, then it runs in polynomial time.

Also show that a polynomial number of calls to polynomial-time
subroutines may result in an exponential-time algorithm.

34.1-6

Show that the class P, viewed as a set of languages, is closed under
union, intersection, concatenation, complement, and Kleene star. That

is, if L1, L2 P, then L1 L2 P, L1 L2 P, L1L2 P, L1 P, and

.