34.2 Polynomial-time verification

Now, let's look at algorithms that verify membership in languages. For

example, suppose that for a given instance G, u, v, k of the decision
problem PATH, you are also given a path p from u to v. You can check
whether p is a path in G and whether the length of p is at most k, and if
so, you can view p as a "certificate" that the instance indeed belongs to

PATH. For the decision problem PATH, this certificate doesn't seem to
buy much. After all, PATH belongs to P--in fact, you can solve PATH
in linear time--and so verifying membership from a given certificate
takes as long as solving the problem from scratch. Instead, let's examine
a problem for which we know of no polynomial-time decision algorithm
and yet, given a certificate, verification is easy.

Hamiltonian cycles

The problem of finding a hamiltonian cycle in an undirected graph has

been studied for over a hundred years. Formally, a hamiltonian cycle of
an undirected graph G = (V, E) is a simple cycle that contains each
vertex in V. A graph that contains a hamiltonian cycle is said to be
hamiltonian, and otherwise, it is nonhamiltonian. The name honors W. R.

Hamilton, who described a mathematical game on the dodecahedron
(Figure 34.2(a)) in which one player sticks five pins in any five
consecutive vertices and the other player must complete the path to
form a cycle containing all the vertices.8 The dodecahedron is
hamiltonian, and Figure 34.2(a) shows one hamiltonian cycle. Not all

graphs are hamiltonian, however. For example, Figure 34.2(b) shows a

bipartite graph with an odd number of vertices. Exercise 34.2-2 asks

you to show that all such graphs are nonhamiltonian.

Here is how to define the hamiltonian-cycle problem, "Does a graph
G have a hamiltonian cycle?" as a formal language:

HAM-CYCLE = {G : G is a hamiltonian graph}.

How might an algorithm decide the language HAM-CYCLE? Given a

problem instance G, one possible decision algorithm lists all

permutations of the vertices of G and then checks each permutation to

see whether it is a hamiltonian cycle. What is the running time of this

algorithm? It depends on the encoding of the graph G. Let's say that G

is encoded as its adjacency matrix. If the adjacency matrix contains n

entries, so that the length of the encoding of G equals n, then the

number m of vertices in the graph is . There are m! possible

permutations of the vertices, and therefore the running time is

, which is not O(nk) for any constant k. Thus,

this naive algorithm does not run in polynomial time. In fact, the

hamiltonian-cycle problem is NP-complete, as we'll prove in Section

34.5.

Figure 34.2 (a) A graph representing the vertices, edges, and faces of a dodecahedron, with a
hamiltonian cycle shown by edges highlighted in blue. (b) A bipartite graph with an odd
number of vertices. Any such graph is nonhamiltonian.

Verification algorithms

Consider a slightly easier problem. Suppose that a friend tells you that a

given graph G is hamiltonian, and then the friend offers to prove it by

giving you the vertices in order along the hamiltonian cycle. It would
certainly be easy enough to verify the proof: simply verify that the
provided cycle is hamiltonian by checking whether it is a permutation of

the vertices of V and whether each of the consecutive edges along the

cycle actually exists in the graph. You could certainly implement this

verification algorithm to run in O(n2) time, where n is the length of the
encoding of G. Thus, a proof that a hamiltonian cycle exists in a graph

can be verified in polynomial time.

We define a verification algorithm as being a two-argument algorithm
A, where one argument is an ordinary input string x and the other is a
binary string y called a certificate. A two-argument algorithm A verifies
an input string x if there exists a certificate y such that A(x, y) = 1. The
language verified by a verification algorithm A is

L = {x {0, 1}* : there exists y {0, 1}* such that A(x, y) = 1}.

Think of an algorithm A as verifying a language L if, for any string x
L, there exists a certificate y that A can use to prove that x L.
Moreover, for any string x L, there must be no certificate proving that
x L. For example, in the hamiltonian-cycle problem, the certificate is

the list of vertices in some hamiltonian cycle. If a graph is hamiltonian,
the hamiltonian cycle itself offers enough information to verify that the
graph is indeed hamiltonian. Conversely, if a graph is not hamiltonian,
there can be no list of vertices that fools the verification algorithm into
believing that the graph is hamiltonian, since the verification algorithm
carefully checks the so-called cycle to be sure.

The complexity class NP

The complexity class NP is the class of languages that can be verified by
a polynomial-time algorithm.9 More precisely, a language L belongs to
NP if and only if there exist a two-input polynomial-time algorithm A
and a constant c such that

L = {x {0, 1}*: there exists a certificate y with |y| = O(|x|c)
such that A(x, y) = 1}.

We say that algorithm A verifies language L in polynomial time.

From our earlier discussion about the hamiltonian-cycle problem,
you can see that HAM-CYCLE NP. (It is always nice to know that an

important set is nonempty.) Moreover, if L P, then L NP, since if
there is a polynomial-time algorithm to decide L, the algorithm can be

converted to a two-argument verification algorithm that simply ignores
any certificate and accepts exactly those input strings it determines to

belong to L. Thus, P NP.

That leaves the question of whether P = NP. A definitive answer is
unknown, but most researchers believe that P and NP are not the same
class. Think of the class P as consisting of problems that can be solved
quickly and the class NP as consisting of problems for which a solution
can be verified quickly. You may have learned from experience that it is
often more difficult to solve a problem from scratch than to verify a
clearly presented solution, especially when working under time

constraints. Theoretical computer scientists generally believe that this
analogy extends to the classes P and NP, and thus that NP includes
languages that do not belong to P.

Figure 34.3 Four possibilities for relationships among complexity classes. In each diagram, one
region enclosing another indicates a proper-subset relation. (a) P = NP = co-NP. Most
researchers regard this possibility as the most unlikely. (b) If NP is closed under complement,
then NP = co-NP, but it need not be the case that P = NP. (c) P = NP co-NP, but NP is not
closed under complement. (d) NP co-NP and P NP co-NP. Most researchers regard this
possibility as the most likely.

There is more compelling, though not conclusive, evidence that P
NP--the existence of languages that are "NP-complete." Section 34.3
will study this class.

Many other fundamental questions beyond the P NP question
remain unresolved. Figure 34.3 shows some possible scenarios. Despite
much work by many researchers, no one even knows whether the class

NP is closed under complement. That is, does L NP imply L NP?
We define the complexity class co-NP as the set of languages L such
that L NP, so that the question of whether NP is closed under

complement is also whether NP = co-NP. Since P is closed under
complement (Exercise 34.1-6), it follows from Exercise 34.2-9 (P coNP) that P NP co-NP. Once again, however, no one knows whether
P = NP co-NP or whether there is some language in (NP co-NP) -
P.

Thus our understanding of the precise relationship between P and
NP is woefully incomplete. Nevertheless, even though we might not be
able to prove that a particular problem is intractable, if we can prove
that it is NP-complete, then we have gained valuable information about
it.

Exercises

34.2-1
Consider the language GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM = {G1, G2 : G1 and
G2 are isomorphic graphs}. Prove that GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM

NP by describing a polynomial-time algorithm to verify the language.

34.2-2
Prove that if G is an undirected bipartite graph with an odd number of
vertices, then G is nonhamiltonian.

34.2-3

Show that if HAM-CYCLE P, then the problem of listing the vertices
of a hamiltonian cycle, in order, is polynomial-time solvable.

34.2-4

Prove that the class NP of languages is closed under union, intersection,
concatenation, and Kleene star. Discuss the closure of NP under
complement.

34.2-5

Show that any language in NP can be decided by an algorithm with a

running time of for some constant k.

34.2-6
A hamiltonian path in a graph is a simple path that visits every vertex

exactly once. Show that the language HAM-PATH = {G, u, v : there is
a hamiltonian path from u to v in graph G} belongs to NP.

34.2-7

Show that the hamiltonian-path problem from Exercise 34.2-6 can be
solved in polynomial time on directed acyclic graphs. Give an efficient
algorithm for the problem.

34.2-8

Let be a boolean formula constructed from the boolean input

variables x1, x2, ... , xk, negations (¬), ANDs (), ORs (), and
parentheses. The formula is a tautology if it evaluates to 1 for every

assignment of 1 and 0 to the input variables. Define TAUTOLOGY as
the language of boolean formulas that are tautologies. Show that
TAUTOLOGY co-NP.

34.2-9

Prove that P co-NP.

34.2-10

Prove that if NP co-NP, then P NP.

34.2-11
Let G be a connected, undirected graph with at least three vertices, and
let G3 be the graph obtained by connecting all pairs of vertices that are
connected by a path in G of length at most 3. Prove that G3 is
hamiltonian. (Hint: Construct a spanning tree for G, and use an

inductive argument.)