34.3 NP-completeness and reducibility

Perhaps the most compelling reason why theoretical computer
scientists believe that P NP comes from the existence of the class of

NP-complete problems. This class has the intriguing property that if any
NP-complete problem can be solved in polynomial time, then every

problem in NP has a polynomial-time solution, that is, P = NP. Despite
decades of study, though, no polynomial-time algorithm has ever been
discovered for any NP-complete problem.

The language HAM-CYCLE is one NP-complete problem. If there
were an algorithm to decide HAM-CYCLE in polynomial time, then
every problem in NP could be solved in polynomial time. The NPcomplete languages are, in a sense, the "hardest" languages in NP. In
fact, if NP - P turns out to be nonempty, we will be able to say with
certainty that HAM-CYCLE NP - P.

This section starts by showing how to compare the relative
"hardness" of languages using a precise notion called "polynomial-time
reducibility." It then formally defines the NP-complete languages,
finishing by sketching a proof that one such language, called CIRCUITSAT, is NP-complete. Sections 34.4 and 34.5 will use the notion of
reducibility to show that many other problems are NP-complete.

Reducibility

One way that sometimes works for solving a problem is to recast it as a

different problem. We call that strategy "reducing" one problem to

another. Think of a problem Q as being reducible to another problem

Q if any instance of Q can be recast as an instance of Q, and the

solution to the instance of Q provides a solution to the instance of Q.

For example, the problem of solving linear equations in an

indeterminate x reduces to the problem of solving quadratic equations.

Given a linear-equation instance ax + b = 0 (with solution x = -b/a),

you can transform it to the quadratic equation ax2 + bx + 0 = 0. This

quadratic equation has the solutions , where c =

0, so that . The solutions are then x = (-b + b)/2a = 0 and

x = (-b - b)/2a = -b/a, thereby providing a solution to ax + b = 0.

Thus, if a problem Q reduces to another problem Q, then Q is, in a

sense, "no harder to solve" than Q.

Figure 34.4 A function f that reduces language L1 to language L2. For any input x {0, 1}*,
the question of whether x L1 has the same answer as the question of whether f (x) L2.

Returning to our formal-language framework for decision problems,

we say that a language L1 is polynomial-time reducible to a language L2,
written L1 P L2, if there exists a polynomial-time computable function
f : {0, 1}* {0, 1}* such that for all x {0, 1}*,

We call the function f the reduction function, and a polynomial-time
algorithm F that computes f is a reduction algorithm.

Figure 34.4 illustrates the idea of a reduction from a language L1 to
another language L2. Each language is a subset of {0, 1}*. The
reduction function f provides a mapping such that if x L1, then f (x)
L2. Moreover, if x L1, then f (x) L2. Thus, the reduction function
maps any instance x of the decision problem represented by the
language L1 to an instance f (x) of the problem represented by L2.
Providing an answer to whether f (x) L2 directly provides the answer
to whether x L1. If, in addition, f can be computed in polynomial

time, it is a polynomial-time reduction function.
Polynomial-time reductions give us a powerful tool for proving that

various languages belong to P.

Lemma 34.3

If L1, L2 {0, 1}* are languages such that L1 P L2, then L2 P
implies L1 P.

Figure 34.5 The proof of Lemma 34.3. The algorithm F is a reduction algorithm that computes
the reduction function f from L1 to L2 in polynomial time, and A2 is a polynomial-time
algorithm that decides L2. Algorithm A1 decides whether x L1 by using F to transform any
input x into f (x) and then using A2 to decide whether f (x) L2.

Proof Let A2 be a polynomial-time algorithm that decides L2, and let
F be a polynomial-time reduction algorithm that computes the
reduction function f. We show how to construct a polynomial-time
algorithm A1 that decides L1.

Figure 34.5 illustrates how we construct A1. For a given input x {0,
1}*, algorithm A1 uses F to transform x into f (x), and then it uses A2
to test whether f (x) L2. Algorithm A1 takes the output from
algorithm A2 and produces that answer as its own output.

The correctness of A1 follows from condition (34.1). The algorithm
runs in polynomial time, since both F and A2 run in polynomial time

(see Exercise 34.1-5).

NP-completeness

Polynomial-time reductions allow us to formally show that one problem
is at least as hard as another, to within a polynomial-time factor. That

is, if L1 P L2, then L1 is not more than a polynomial factor harder
than L2, which is why the "less than or equal to" notation for reduction

is mnemonic. We can now define the set of NP-complete languages,
which are the hardest problems in NP.

A language L {0, 1}* is NP-complete if
1. L NP, and
2. L P L for every L NP.

If a language L satisfies property 2, but not necessarily property 1, we
say that L is NP-hard. We also define NPC to be the class of NP-

complete languages.
As the following theorem shows, NP-completeness is at the crux of

deciding whether P is in fact equal to NP.

Theorem 34.4

If any NP-complete problem is polynomial-time solvable, then P = NP.
Equivalently, if any problem in NP is not polynomial-time solvable, then
no NP-complete problem is polynomial-time solvable.

Figure 34.6 How most theoretical computer scientists view the relationships among P, NP, and
NPC. Both P and NPC are wholly contained within NP, and P NPC = Ø.

Proof Suppose that L P and also that L NPC. For any L NP, we
have L P L by property 2 of the definition of NP-completeness. Thus,
by Lemma 34.3, we also have that L P, which proves the first

statement of the theorem.
To prove the second statement, consider the contrapositive of the

first statement: if P NP, then there does not exist an NP-complete
problem that is polynomial-time solvable. But P NP means that there
is some problem in NP that is not polynomial-time solvable, and hence
the second statement is the contrapositive of the first statement.

It is for this reason that research into the P NP question centers
around the NP-complete problems. Most theoretical computer
scientists believe that P NP, which leads to the relationships among P,
NP, and NPC shown in Figure 34.6. For all we know, however, someone
may yet come up with a polynomial-time algorithm for an NP-complete
problem, thus proving that P = NP. Nevertheless, since no polynomialtime algorithm for any NP-complete problem has yet been discovered, a
proof that a problem is NP-complete provides excellent evidence that it
is intractable.

Circuit satisfiability
We have defined the notion of an NP-complete problem, but up to this
point, we have not actually proved that any problem is NP-complete.
Once we prove that at least one problem is NP-complete, polynomialtime reducibility becomes a tool to prove other problems to be NPcomplete. Thus, we now focus on demonstrating the existence of an NPcomplete problem: the circuit-satisfiability problem.

Unfortunately, the formal proof that the circuit-satisfiability problem
is NP-complete requires technical detail beyond the scope of this text.
Instead, we'll informally describe a proof that relies on a basic
understanding of boolean combinational circuits.

Figure 34.7 Three basic logic gates, with binary inputs and outputs. Under each gate is the
truth table that describes the gate's operation. (a) The NOT gate. (b) The AND gate. (c) The
OR gate.

Boolean combinational circuits are built from boolean combinational

elements that are interconnected by wires. A boolean combinational

element is any circuit element that has a constant number of boolean

inputs and outputs and that performs a well-defined function. Boolean

values are drawn from the set {0, 1}, where 0 represents FALSE and 1

represents TRUE.

The boolean combinational elements appearing in the circuit-

satisfiability problem compute simple boolean functions, and they are

known as logic gates. Figure 34.7 shows the three basic logic gates used
in the circuit-satisfiability problem: the NOT gate (or inverter), the AND
gate, and the OR gate. The NOT gate takes a single binary input x,
whose value is either 0 or 1, and produces a binary output z whose value

is opposite that of the input value. Each of the other two gates takes

two binary inputs x and y and produces a single binary output z.

The operation of each gate, or of any boolean combinational

element, is defined by a truth table, shown under each gate in Figure

34.7. A truth table gives the outputs of the combinational element for

each possible setting of the inputs. For example, the truth table for the

OR gate says that when the inputs are x = 0 and y = 1, the output value
is z = 1. The symbol ¬ denotes the NOT function, denotes the AND

function, and denotes the OR function. Thus, for example, 0 1 = 1.

AND and OR gates are not limited to just two inputs. An AND

gate's output is 1 if all of its inputs are 1, and its output is 0 otherwise.

An OR gate's output is 1 if any of its inputs are 1, and its output is 0

otherwise.

A boolean combinational circuit consists of one or more boolean
combinational elements interconnected by wires. A wire can connect

the output of one element to the input of another, so that the output

value of the first element becomes an input value of the second. Figure

34.8 shows two similar boolean combinational circuits, differing in only

one gate. Part (a) of the figure also shows the values on the individual

wires, given the input x1 = 1, x2 = 1, x3 = 0. Although a single wire

may have no more than one combinational-element output connected

to it, it can feed several element inputs. The number of element inputs

fed by a wire is called the fan-out of the wire. If no element output is
connected to a wire, the wire is a circuit input, accepting input values

from an external source. If no element input is connected to a wire, the

wire is a circuit output, providing the results of the circuit's computation

to the outside world. (An internal wire can also fan out to a circuit
output.) For the purpose of defining the circuit-satisfiability problem,
we limit the number of circuit outputs to 1, though in actual hardware
design, a boolean combinational circuit may have multiple outputs.

Figure 34.8 Two instances of the circuit-satisfiability problem. (a) The assignment x1 = 1, x2
= 1, x3 = 0 to the inputs of this circuit causes the output of the circuit to be 1. The circuit is

therefore satisfiable. (b) No assignment to the inputs of this circuit can cause the output of the
circuit to be 1. The circuit is therefore unsatisfiable.

Boolean combinational circuits contain no cycles. In other words, for

a given combinational circuit, imagine a directed graph G = (V, E) with
one vertex for each combinational element and with k directed edges
for each wire whose fan-out is k, where the graph contains a directed
edge (u, v) if a wire connects the output of element u to an input of
element v. Then G must be acyclic.

A truth assignment for a boolean combinational circuit is a set of

boolean input values. We say that a 1-output boolean combinational

circuit is satisfiable if it has a satisfying assignment: a truth assignment

that causes the output of the circuit to be 1. For example, the circuit in

Figure 34.8(a) has the satisfying assignment x1 = 1, x2 = 1, x3 = 0,

and so it is satisfiable. As Exercise 34.3-1 asks you to show, no

assignment of values to x1, x2, and x3 causes the circuit in Figure

34.8(b) to produce a 1 output. Since it always produces 0, it is
unsatisfiable.

The circuit-satisfiability problem is, "Given a boolean combinational

circuit composed of AND, OR, and NOT gates, is it satisfiable?" In
order to pose this question formally, however, we must agree on a

standard encoding for circuits. The size of a boolean combinational

circuit is the number of boolean combinational elements plus the
number of wires in the circuit. We could devise a graph-like encoding

that maps any given circuit C into a binary string C whose length is

polynomial in the size of the circuit itself. As a formal language, we can
therefore define

CIRCUIT-SAT = {C : C is a satisfiable boolean combinational

circuit}.

The circuit-satisfiability problem arises in the area of computeraided hardware optimization. If a subcircuit always produces 0, that
subcircuit is unnecessary: the designer can replace it by a simpler
subcircuit that omits all logic gates and provides the constant 0 value as
its output. You can see the value in having a polynomial-time algorithm
for this problem.

Given a circuit C, you can determine whether it is satisfiable by

simply checking all possible assignments to the inputs. Unfortunately, if

the circuit has k inputs, then you would have to check up to 2k possible
assignments. When the size of C is polynomial in k, checking all possible
assignments to the inputs takes (2k) time, which is superpolynomial in

the size of the circuit.10 In fact, as we have claimed, there is strong
evidence that no polynomial-time algorithm exists that solves the
circuit-satisfiability problem because circuit satisfiability is NPcomplete. We break the proof of this fact into two parts, based on the
two parts of the definition of NP-completeness.

Lemma 34.5

The circuit-satisfiability problem belongs to the class NP.

Proof We provide a two-input, polynomial-time algorithm A that can
verify CIRCUIT-SAT. One of the inputs to A is (a standard encoding
of) a boolean combinational circuit C. The other input is a certificate

corresponding to an assignment of a boolean value to each of the wires

in C. (See Exercise 34.3-4 for a smaller certificate.)
The algorithm A works as follows. For each logic gate in the circuit,

it checks that the value provided by the certificate on the output wire is
correctly computed as a function of the values on the input wires. Then,

if the output of the entire circuit is 1, algorithm A outputs 1, since the
values assigned to the inputs of C provide a satisfying assignment.
Otherwise, A outputs 0.

Whenever a satisfiable circuit C is input to algorithm A, there exists
a certificate whose length is polynomial in the size of C and that causes
A to output a 1. Whenever an unsatisfiable circuit is input, no certificate
can fool A into believing that the circuit is satisfiable. Algorithm A runs

in polynomial time, and with a good implementation, linear time
suffices. Thus, CIRCUIT-SAT is verifiable in polynomial time, and
CIRCUIT-SAT NP.

The second part of proving that CIRCUIT-SAT is NP-complete is to

show that the language is NP-hard: that every language in NP is

polynomial-time reducible to CIRCUIT-SAT. The actual proof of this
fact is full of technical intricacies, and so instead we'll sketch the proof
based on some understanding of the workings of computer hardware.

A computer program is stored in the computer's memory as a
sequence of instructions. A typical instruction encodes an operation to
be performed, addresses of operands in memory, and an address where

the result is to be stored. A special memory location, called the program
counter, keeps track of which instruction is to be executed next. The

program counter automatically increments when each instruction is
fetched, thereby causing the computer to execute instructions
sequentially. Certain instructions can cause a value to be written to the
program counter, however, which alters the normal sequential execution
and allows the computer to loop and perform conditional branches.

At any point while a program executes, the computer's memory
holds the entire state of the computation. (Consider the memory to
include the program itself, the program counter, working storage, and
any of the various bits of state that a computer maintains for

bookkeeping.) We call any particular state of computer memory a

configuration. When an instruction executes, it transforms the

configuration. Think of an instruction as mapping one configuration to

another. The computer hardware that accomplishes this mapping can

be implemented as a boolean combinational circuit, which we denote by

M in the proof of the following lemma.

Lemma 34.6

The circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-hard.

Proof Let L be any language in NP. We'll describe a polynomial-time
algorithm F computing a reduction function f that maps every binary
string x to a circuit C = f (x) such that x L if and only if C

CIRCUIT-SAT.

Since L NP, there must exist an algorithm A that verifies L in
polynomial time. The algorithm F that we construct uses the two-input
algorithm A to compute the reduction function f.

Let T (n) denote the worst-case running time of algorithm A on
length-n input strings, and let k 1 be a constant such that T (n) =
O(nk) and the length of the certificate is O(nk). (The running time of A

is actually a polynomial in the total input size, which includes both an

input string and a certificate, but since the length of the certificate is

polynomial in the length n of the input string, the running time is
polynomial in n.)

Figure 34.9 The sequence of configurations produced by an algorithm A running on an input x
and certificate y. Each configuration represents the state of the computer for one step of the
computation and, besides A, x, and y, includes the program counter (PC), auxiliary machine
state, and working storage. Except for the certificate y, the initial configuration c0 is constant.
A boolean combinational circuit M maps each configuration to the next configuration. The

output is a distinguished bit in the working storage.

The basic idea of the proof is to represent the computation of A as a

sequence of configurations. As Figure 34.9 illustrates, consider each

configuration as comprising a few parts: the program for A, the
program counter and auxiliary machine state, the input x, the certificate
y, and working storage. The combinational circuit M, which implements

the computer hardware, maps each configuration ci to the next
configuration ci+1, starting from the initial configuration c0. Algorithm
A writes its output--0 or 1--to some designated location by the time it
finishes executing. After A halts, the output value never changes. Thus,
if the algorithm runs for at most T (n) steps, the output appears as one
of the bits in cT(n).

The reduction algorithm F constructs a single combinational circuit

that computes all configurations produced by a given initial

configuration. The idea is to paste together T (n) copies of the circuit
M. The output of the ith circuit, which produces configuration ci, feeds
directly into the input of the (i +1)st circuit. Thus, the configurations,

rather than being stored in the computer's memory, simply reside as

values on the wires connecting copies of M.
Recall what the polynomial-time reduction algorithm F must do.

Given an input x, it must compute a circuit C = f (x) that is satisfiable if
and only if there exists a certificate y such that A(x, y) = 1. When F
obtains an input x, it first computes n = |x| and constructs a
combinational circuit C consisting of T (n) copies of M. The input to C
is an initial configuration corresponding to a computation on A(x, y),
and the output is the configuration cT(n).

Algorithm F modifies circuit C slightly to construct the circuit C = f
(x). First, it wires the inputs to C corresponding to the program for A,
the initial program counter, the input x, and the initial state of memory

directly to these known values. Thus, the only remaining inputs to the

circuit correspond to the certificate y. Second, it ignores all outputs
from C, except for the one bit of cT(n) corresponding to the output of
A. This circuit C, so constructed, computes C(y) = A(x, y) for any input
y of length O(nk). The reduction algorithm F, when provided an input
string x, computes such a circuit C and outputs it.

We need to prove two properties. First, we must show that F
correctly computes a reduction function f. That is, we must show that C
is satisfiable if and only if there exists a certificate y such that A(x, y) =
1. Second, we must show that F runs in polynomial time.

To show that F correctly computes a reduction function, suppose
that there exists a certificate y of length O(nk) such that A(x, y) = 1.
Then, upon applying the bits of y to the inputs of C, the output of C is
C(y) = A(x, y) = 1. Thus, if a certificate exists, then C is satisfiable. For
the other direction, suppose that C is satisfiable. Hence, there exists an
input y to C such that C(y) = 1, from which we conclude that A(x, y) =
1. Thus, F correctly computes a reduction function.

To complete the proof sketch, we need to show that F runs in time
polynomial in n = |x|. First, the number of bits required to represent a
configuration is polynomial in n. Why? The program for A itself has
constant size, independent of the length of its input x. The length of the
input x is n, and the length of the certificate y is O(nk). Since the
algorithm runs for at most O(nk) steps, the amount of working storage
required by A is polynomial in n as well. (We implicitly assume that this

memory is contiguous. Exercise 34.3-5 asks you to extend the argument

to the situation in which the locations accessed by A are scattered

across a much larger region of memory and the particular pattern of

scattering can differ for each input x.)
The combinational circuit M implementing the computer hardware

has size polynomial in the length of a configuration, which is O(nk), and
hence, the size of M is polynomial in n. (Most of this circuitry
implements the logic of the memory system.) The circuit C consists of
O(nk) copies of M, and hence it has size polynomial in n. The reduction
algorithm F can construct C from x in polynomial time, since each step

of the construction takes polynomial time.

The language CIRCUIT-SAT is therefore at least as hard as any

language in NP, and since it belongs to NP, it is NP-complete.

Theorem 34.7

The circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete.

Proof Immediate from Lemmas 34.5 and 34.6 and from the definition

of NP-completeness.

Exercises

34.3-1

Verify that the circuit in Figure 34.8(b) is unsatisfiable.

34.3-2

Show that the P relation is a transitive relation on languages. That is,

show that if L1 P L2 and L2 P L3, then L1 P L3.

34.3-3
Prove that L P L if and only if L P L.

34.3-4

Show that an alternative proof of Lemma 34.5 can use a satisfying
assignment as a certificate. Which certificate makes for an easier proof ?

34.3-5

The proof of Lemma 34.6 assumes that the working storage for

algorithm A occupies a contiguous region of polynomial size. Where

does the proof exploit this assumption? Argue that this assumption
does not involve any loss of generality.

34.3-6
A language L is complete for a language class C with respect to
polynomial-time reductions if L C and L P L for all L C. Show

that Ø and {0, 1}* are the only languages in P that are not complete for
P with respect to polynomial-time reductions.

34.3-7

Show that, with respect to polynomial-time reductions (see Exercise

34.3-6), L is complete for NP if and only if L is complete for co-NP.

34.3-8
The reduction algorithm F in the proof of Lemma 34.6 constructs the
circuit C = f (x) based on knowledge of x, A, and k. Professor Sartre

observes that the string x is input to F, but only the existence of A, k,
and the constant factor implicit in the O(nk) running time is known to F
(since the language L belongs to NP), not their actual values. Thus, the
professor concludes that F cannot possibly construct the circuit C and

that the language CIRCUIT-SAT is not necessarily NP-hard. Explain
the flaw in the professor's reasoning.