34.4 NP-completeness proofs

The proof that the circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete showed

directly that L P CIRCUIT-SAT for every language L NP. This

section shows how to prove that languages are NP-complete without

directly reducing every language in NP to the given language. We'll

explore examples of this methodology by proving that various formulasatisfiability problems are NP-complete. Section 34.5 provides many
more examples.

The following lemma provides a foundation for showing that a given
language is NP-complete.

Lemma 34.8
If L is a language such that L P L for some L NPC, then L is NPhard. If, in addition, we have L NP, then L NPC.

Proof Since L is NP-complete, for all L NP, we have L P L. By
supposition, we have L P L, and thus by transitivity (Exercise 34.3-2),
we have L P L, which shows that L is NP-hard. If L NP, we also
have L NPC.

In other words, by reducing a known NP-complete language L to L,
we implicitly reduce every language in NP to L. Thus, Lemma 34.8
provides a method for proving that a language L is NP-complete:

1. Prove L NP.

2. Prove that L is NP-hard:

a. Select a known NP-complete language L.

b. Describe an algorithm that computes a function f mapping
every instance x {0, 1}* of L to an instance f (x) of L.

c. Prove that the function f satisfies x L if and only if f (x) L
for all x {0, 1}*.

d. Prove that the algorithm computing f runs in polynomial time.

This methodology of reducing from a single known NP-complete
language is far simpler than the more complicated process of showing
directly how to reduce from every language in NP. Proving CIRCUITSAT NPC furnishes a starting point. Knowing that the circuitsatisfiability problem is NP-complete makes it much easier to prove that
other problems are NP-complete. Moreover, as the catalog of known
NP-complete problems grows, so will the choices for languages from
which to reduce.

Formula satisfiability

To illustrate the reduction methodology, let's see an NP-completeness

proof for the problem of determining whether a boolean formula, not a
circuit, is satisfiable. This problem has the historical honor of being the

first problem ever shown to be NP-complete.

We formulate the (formula) satisfiability problem in terms of the

language SAT as follows. An instance of SAT is a boolean formula
composed of

1. n boolean variables: x1, x2, ... , xn;
2. m boolean connectives: any boolean function with one or two

inputs and one output, such as (AND), (OR), ¬ (NOT),
(implication), (if and only if); and

3. parentheses. (Without loss of generality, assume that there are
no redundant parentheses, i.e., a formula contains at most one
pair of parentheses per boolean connective.)

We can encode a boolean formula in a length that is polynomial in n +
m. As in boolean combinational circuits, a truth assignment for a

boolean formula is a set of values for the variables of , and a

satisfying assignment is a truth assignment that causes it to evaluate to
1. A formula with a satisfying assignment is a satisfiable formula. The

satisfiability problem asks whether a given boolean formula is satisfiable,
which we can express in formal-language terms as

SAT = { : is a satisfiable boolean formula}.
As an example, the formula

= ((x1 x2) ¬((¬x1 x3) x4)) ¬x2
has the satisfying assignment x1 = 0, x2 = 0, x3 = 1, x4 = 1, since

and thus this formula belongs to SAT.
The naive algorithm to determine whether an arbitrary boolean

formula is satisfiable does not run in polynomial time. A formula with n
variables has 2n possible assignments. If the length of is polynomial
in n, then checking every assignment requires (2n) time, which is

superpolynomial in the length of . As the following theorem shows, a
polynomial-time algorithm is unlikely to exist.

Theorem 34.9

Satisfiability of boolean formulas is NP-complete.

Proof We start by arguing that SAT NP. Then we prove that SAT is

NP-hard by showing that CIRCUIT-SAT P SAT, which by Lemma
34.8 will prove the theorem.

To show that SAT belongs to NP, we show that a certificate
consisting of a satisfying assignment for an input formula can be

verified in polynomial time. The verifying algorithm simply replaces
each variable in the formula with its corresponding value and then
evaluates the expression, much as we did in equation (34.2) above. This
task can be done in polynomial time. If the expression evaluates to 1,
then the algorithm has verified that the formula is satisfiable. Thus, SAT
belongs to NP.

To prove that SAT is NP-hard, we show that CIRCUIT-SAT P SAT.
In other words, we need to show how to reduce any instance of circuit
satisfiability to an instance of formula satisfiability in polynomial time.
We can use induction to express any boolean combinational circuit as a
boolean formula. We simply look at the gate that produces the circuit
output and inductively express each of the gate's inputs as formulas. We
then obtain the formula for the circuit by writing an expression that
applies the gate's function to its inputs' formulas.

Figure 34.10 Reducing circuit satisfiability to formula satisfiability. The formula produced by
the reduction algorithm has a variable for each wire in the circuit and a clause for each logic
gate.

Unfortunately, this straightforward method does not amount to a
polynomial-time reduction. As Exercise 34.4-1 asks you to show, shared
subformulas--which arise from gates whose output wires have fan-out
of 2 or more--can cause the size of the generated formula to grow
exponentially. Thus, the reduction algorithm must be somewhat more
clever.

Figure 34.10 illustrates how to overcome this problem, using as an

example the circuit from Figure 34.8(a). For each wire xi in the circuit
C, the formula has a variable xi. To express how each gate operates,

construct a small formula involving the variables of its incident wires.
The formula has the form of an "if and only if " (), with the variable
for the gate's output on the left and on the right a logical expression
encapsulating the gate's function on its inputs. For example, the
operation of the output AND gate (the rightmost gate in the figure) is

x10 (x7 x8 x9). We call each of these small formulas a clause.

The formula produced by the reduction algorithm is the AND of
the circuit-output variable with the conjunction of clauses describing
the operation of each gate. For the circuit in the figure, the formula is

= x10 (x4 ¬x3)
(x5 (x1 x2))
(x6 ¬x4)
(x7 (x1 x2 x4))
(x8 (x5 x6))
(x9 (x6 x7))
(x10 (x7 x8 x9)).

Given a circuit C, it is straightforward to produce such a formula in

polynomial time.

Why is the circuit C satisfiable exactly when the formula is
satisfiable? If C has a satisfying assignment, then each wire of the circuit

has a well-defined value, and the output of the circuit is 1. Therefore,
when wire values are assigned to variables in , each clause of
evaluates to 1, and thus the conjunction of all evaluates to 1.

Conversely, if some assignment causes to evaluate to 1, the circuit C is

satisfiable by an analogous argument. Thus, we have shown that
CIRCUIT-SAT P SAT, which completes the proof.

3-CNF satisfiability

Reducing from formula satisfiability gives us an avenue to prove many
problems NP-complete. The reduction algorithm must handle any input

formula, though, and this requirement can lead to a huge number of
cases to consider. Instead, it is usually simpler to reduce from a
restricted language of boolean formulas. Of course, the restricted
language must not be polynomial-time solvable. One convenient
language is 3-CNF satisfiability, or 3-CNF-SAT.

In order to define 3-CNF satisfiability, we first need to define a few

terms. A literal in a boolean formula is an occurrence of a variable (such
as x1) or its negation (¬x1). A clause is the OR of one or more literals,
such as x1 ¬x2 ¬x3. A boolean formula is in conjunctive normal
form, or CNF, if it is expressed as an AND of clauses, and it's in 3conjunctive normal form, or 3-CNF, if each clause contains exactly three

distinct literals.
For example, the boolean formula

(x1 ¬x1 ¬x2) (x3 x2 x4) (¬x1 ¬x3 ¬x4)

is in 3-CNF. The first of its three clauses is (x1 ¬x1 ¬x2), which
contains the three literals x1, ¬x1, and ¬x2.

The language 3-CNF-SAT consists of encodings of boolean
formulas in 3-CNF that are satisfiable. The following theorem shows
that a polynomial-time algorithm that can determine the satisfiability of
boolean formulas is unlikely to exist, even when they are expressed in
this simple normal form.

Theorem 34.10

Satisfiability of boolean formulas in 3-conjunctive normal form is NPcomplete.

Proof The argument from the proof of Theorem 34.9 to show that SAT

NP applies equally well here to show that 3-CNF-SAT NP. By
Lemma 34.8, therefore, we need only show that SAT P 3-CNF-SAT.

Figure 34.11 The tree corresponding to the formula = ((x1 x2)¬((¬x1 x3)x4))¬x2.

We break the reduction algorithm into three basic steps. Each step
progressively transforms the input formula closer to the desired 3conjunctive normal form.

The first step is similar to the one used to prove CIRCUIT-SAT P
SAT in Theorem 34.9. First, construct a binary "parse" tree for the
input formula , with literals as leaves and connectives as internal
nodes. Figure 34.11 shows such a parse tree for the formula

If the input formula contains a clause such as the OR of several literals,
use associativity to parenthesize the expression fully so that every
internal node in the resulting tree has just one or two children. The
binary parse tree is like a circuit for computing the function.

Mimicking the reduction in the proof of Theorem 34.9, introduce a

variable yi for the output of each internal node. Then rewrite the

original formula as the AND of the variable at the root of the parse
tree and a conjunction of clauses describing the operation of each node.
For the formula (34.3), the resulting expression is

= y1 (y1 (y2 ¬x2))

(y2 (y3 y4))
(y3 (x1 x2))
(y4 ¬y5)
(y5 (y6 x4))
(y6 (¬x1 x3)).

Figure 34.12 The truth table for the clause (y1 (y2 ¬x2)).

The formula thus obtained is a conjunction of clauses , each of
which has at most three literals. These clauses are not yet ORs of three
literals.

The second step of the reduction converts each clause into
conjunctive normal form. Construct a truth table for by evaluating all
possible assignments to its variables. Each row of the truth table
consists of a possible assignment of the variables of the clause, together
with the value of the clause under that assignment. Using the truth-

table entries that evaluate to 0, build a formula in disjunctive normal
form (or DNF)--an OR of ANDs--that is equivalent to ¬ . Then

negate this formula and convert it into a CNF formula by using

DeMorgan's laws for propositional logic,
¬(a b) = ¬a ¬b,
¬(a b) = ¬a ¬b,

to complement all literals, change ORs into ANDs, and change ANDs
into ORs.

In our example, the clause converts into CNF
as follows. The truth table for appears in Figure 34.12. The DNF
formula equivalent to ¬ is

(y1 y2 x2) (y1 ¬y2 x2) (y1 ¬y2 ¬x2) (¬y1 y2
¬x2).

Negating and applying DeMorgan's laws yields the CNF formula

which is equivalent to the original clause .
At this point, each clause of the formula has been converted

into a CNF formula , and thus is equivalent to the CNF formula
consisting of the conjunction of the . Moreover, each clause of has
at most three literals.

The third and final step of the reduction further transforms the

formula so that each clause has exactly three distinct literals. From the

clauses of the CNF formula , construct the final 3-CNF formula .

This formula also uses two auxiliary variables, p and q. For each clause
Ci of , include the following clauses in :

If Ci contains three distinct literals, then simply include Ci as a

clause of .

If Ci contains exactly two distinct literals, that is, if Ci = (l1 l2),
where l1 and l2 are literals, then include (l1 l2 p) (l1 l2
¬p) as clauses of . The literals p and ¬p merely fulfill the

syntactic requirement that each clause of contain exactly three

distinct literals. Whether p = 0 or p = 1, one of the clauses is
equivalent to l1 l2, and the other evaluates to 1, which is the

identity for AND.

If Ci contains just one distinct literal l, then include (l p q)(l
p ¬q) (l ¬p q) (l ¬p ¬q) as clauses of . Regardless

of the values of p and q, one of the four clauses is equivalent to l,

and the other three evaluate to 1.

We can see that the 3-CNF formula is satisfiable if and only if is
satisfiable by inspecting each of the three steps. Like the reduction from
CIRCUIT-SAT to SAT, the construction of from in the first step
preserves satisfiability. The second step produces a CNF formula
that is algebraically equivalent to . Then the third step produces a 3CNF formula that is effectively equivalent to , since any

assignment to the variables p and q produces a formula that is

algebraically equivalent to .
We must also show that the reduction can be computed in

polynomial time. Constructing from introduces at most one
variable and one clause per connective in . Constructing from
can introduce at most eight clauses into for each clause from ,
since each clause of contains at most three variables, and the truth
table for each clause has at most 23 = 8 rows. The construction of
from introduces at most four clauses into for each clause of .
Thus the size of the resulting formula is polynomial in the length of
the original formula. Each of the constructions can be accomplished in
polynomial time.

Exercises

34.4-1

Consider the straightforward (nonpolynomial-time) reduction in the

proof of Theorem 34.9. Describe a circuit of size n that, when converted

to a formula by this method, yields a formula whose size is exponential

in n.

34.4-2

Show the 3-CNF formula that results upon using the method of
Theorem 34.10 on the formula (34.3).

34.4-3

Professor Jagger proposes to show that SAT P 3-CNF-SAT by using
only the truth-table technique in the proof of Theorem 34.10, and not
the other steps. That is, the professor proposes to take the boolean
formula , form a truth table for its variables, derive from the truth
table a formula in 3-DNF that is equivalent to ¬, and then negate and
apply DeMorgan's laws to produce a 3-CNF formula equivalent to .
Show that this strategy does not yield a polynomial-time reduction.

34.4-4

Show that the problem of determining whether a boolean formula is a

tautology is complete for co-NP. (Hint: See Exercise 34.3-7.)

34.4-5

Show that the problem of determining the satisfiability of boolean
formulas in disjunctive normal form is polynomial-time solvable.

34.4-6

Someone gives you a polynomial-time algorithm to decide formula
satisfiability. Describe how to use this algorithm to find satisfying
assignments in polynomial time.

34.4-7

Let 2-CNF-SAT be the set of satisfiable boolean formulas in CNF with
exactly two literals per clause. Show that 2-CNF-SAT P. Make your

algorithm as efficient as possible. (Hint: Observe that x y is equivalent
to ¬x y. Reduce 2-CNF-SAT to an efficiently solvable problem on a

directed graph.)