34.5 NP-complete problems

NP-complete problems arise in diverse domains: boolean logic, graphs,
arithmetic, network design, sets and partitions, storage and retrieval,
sequencing and scheduling, mathematical programming, algebra and
number theory, games and puzzles, automata and language theory,
program optimization, biology, chemistry, physics, and more. This
section uses the reduction methodology to provide NP-completeness

proofs for a variety of problems drawn from graph theory and set
partitioning.

Figure 34.13 The structure of NP-completeness proofs in Sections 34.4 and 34.5. All proofs
ultimately follow by reduction from the NP-completeness of CIRCUIT-SAT.

Figure 34.13 outlines the structure of the NP-completeness proofs in
this section and Section 34.4. We prove each language in the figure to be
NP-complete by reduction from the language that points to it. At the
root is CIRCUIT-SAT, which we proved NP-complete in Theorem 34.7.
This section concludes with a recap of reduction strategies.
34.5.1 The clique problem

A clique in an undirected graph G = (V, E) is a subset V V of vertices,
each pair of which is connected by an edge in E. In other words, a
clique is a complete subgraph of G. The size of a clique is the number of
vertices it contains. The clique problem is the optimization problem of

finding a clique of maximum size in a graph. The corresponding

decision problem asks simply whether a clique of a given size k exists in

the graph. The formal definition is

CLIQUE = {G, k : G is a graph containing a clique of size k}.

A naive algorithm for determining whether a graph G = (V, E) with
|V| vertices contains a clique of size k lists all k-subsets of V and checks

each one to see whether it forms a clique. The running time of this

algorithm is , which is polynomial if k is a constant. In general,

however, k could be near |V|/2, in which case the algorithm runs in

superpolynomial time. Indeed, an efficient algorithm for the clique

problem is unlikely to exist.

Theorem 34.11

The clique problem is NP-complete.

Proof First, we show that CLIQUE NP. For a given graph G = (V,

E), use the set V V of vertices in the clique as a certificate for G. To

check whether V is a clique in polynomial time, check whether, for each

pair u, v V, the edge (u, v) belongs to E.

We next prove that 3-CNF-SAT P CLIQUE, which shows that the

clique problem is NP-hard. You might be surprised that the proof

reduces an instance of 3-CNF-SAT to an instance of CLIQUE, since on

the surface logical formulas seem to have little to do with graphs.

The reduction algorithm begins with an instance of 3-CNF-SAT. Let

= C1 C2 Ck be a boolean formula in 3-CNF with k clauses.

For r = 1, 2, ... , k, each clause Cr contains exactly three distinct

literals: , and . We will construct a graph G such that is

satisfiable if and only if G contains a clique of size k.

We construct the undirected graph G = (V, E) as follows. For each

clause in , place a triple of vertices , and into V.

Add edge into E if both of the following hold:

and are in different triples, that is, r s, and is not the
their corresponding literals are consistent, that is,

negation of .

We can build this graph from in polynomial time. As an example of
this construction, if

= (x1 ¬x2 ¬x3) (¬x1 x2 x3) (x1 x2 x3),

then G is the graph shown in Figure 34.14.

We must show that this transformation of into G is a reduction.

First, suppose that has a satisfying assignment. Then each clause Cr

contains at least one literal that is assigned 1, and each such literal

corresponds to a vertex . Picking one such "true" literal from each

clause yields a set V of k vertices. We claim that V is a clique. For any

two vertices , where r s, both corresponding literals and

map to 1 by the given satisfying assignment, and thus the literals cannot

be complements. Thus, by the construction of G, the edge

belongs to E.

Conversely, suppose that G contains a clique V of size k. No edges in

G connect vertices in the same triple, and so V contains exactly one

vertex per triple. If , then assign 1 to the corresponding literal .

Since G contains no edges between inconsistent literals, no literal and

its complement are both assigned 1. Each clause is satisfied, and so is

satisfied. (Any variables that do not correspond to a vertex in the clique

may be set arbitrarily.)

Figure 34.14 The graph G derived from the 3-CNF formula = C1 C2 C3, where C1 =
(x1 ¬x2 ¬x3), C2 = (¬x1 x2 x3), and C3 = (x1 x2 x3), in reducing 3-CNF-SAT to
CLIQUE. A satisfying assignment of the formula has x2 = 0, x3 = 1, and x1 set to either 0 or
1. This assignment satisfies C1 with ¬x2, and it satisfies C2 and C3 with x3, corresponding to

the clique with blue vertices.

In the example of Figure 34.14, a satisfying assignment of has x2 =
0 and x3 = 1. A corresponding clique of size k = 3 consists of the
vertices corresponding to ¬x2 from the first clause, x3 from the second
clause, and x3 from the third clause. Because the clique contains no
vertices corresponding to either x1 or ¬x1, this satisfying assignment
can set x1 to either 0 or 1.

The proof of Theorem 34.11 reduced an arbitrary instance of 3CNF-SAT to an instance of CLIQUE with a particular structure. You
might think that we have shown only that CLIQUE is NP-hard in
graphs in which the vertices are restricted to occur in triples and in
which there are no edges between vertices in the same triple. Indeed, we
have shown that CLIQUE is NP-hard only in this restricted case, but
this proof suffices to show that CLIQUE is NP-hard in general graphs.
Why? If there were a polynomial-time algorithm that solves CLIQUE
on general graphs, it would also solve CLIQUE on restricted graphs.

The opposite approach--reducing instances of 3-CNF-SAT with a
special structure to general instances of CLIQUE--does not suffice,
however. Why not? Perhaps the instances of 3-CNF-SAT that we
choose to reduce from are "easy," and so we would not have reduced an
NP-hard problem to CLIQUE.

Moreover, the reduction uses the instance of 3-CNF-SAT, but not
the solution. We would have erred if the polynomial-time reduction had
relied on knowing whether the formula is satisfiable, since we do not
know how to decide whether is satisfiable in polynomial time.

Figure 34.15 Reducing CLIQUE to VERTEX-COVER. (a) An undirected graph G = (V, E)
with clique V = {u, v, x, y}, shown in blue. (b) The graph G produced by the reduction
algorithm that has vertex cover V - V = {w, z}, in blue.

34.5.2 The vertex-cover problem

A vertex cover of an undirected graph G = (V, E) is a subset V V
such that if (u, v) E, then u V or v V (or both). That is, each
vertex "covers" its incident edges, and a vertex cover for G is a set of
vertices that covers all the edges in E. The size of a vertex cover is the

number of vertices in it. For example, the graph in Figure 34.15(b) has a

vertex cover {w, z} of size 2.
The vertex-cover problem is to find a vertex cover of minimum size in

a given graph. For this optimization problem, the corresponding
decision problem asks whether a graph has a vertex cover of a given

size k. As a language, we define
VERTEX-COVER = {G, k : graph G has a vertex cover of size k}.

The following theorem shows that this problem is NP-complete.

Theorem 34.12

The vertex-cover problem is NP-complete.

Proof We first show that VERTEX-COVER NP. Given a graph G =
(V, E) and an integer k, the certificate is the vertex cover V V itself.
The verification algorithm affirms that |V| = k, and then it checks, for
each edge (u, v) E, that u V or v V. It is easy to verify the

certificate in polynomial time.

To prove that the vertex-cover problem is NP-hard, we reduce from

the clique problem, showing that CLIQUE P VERTEX-COVER. This

reduction relies on the notion of the complement of a graph. Given an

undirected graph G = (V, E), we define the complement of G as a graph
G = (V, E), where E = {(u, v) : u, v V, u v, and (u, v) E}. In other
words, G is the graph containing exactly those edges that are not in G.

Figure 34.15 shows a graph and its complement and illustrates the

reduction from CLIQUE to VERTEX-COVER.

The reduction algorithm takes as input an instance G, k of the
clique problem and computes the complement G in polynomial time.
The output of the reduction algorithm is the instance G, |V| - k of the

vertex-cover problem. To complete the proof, we show that this

transformation is indeed a reduction: the graph G contains a clique of
size k if and only if the graph G has a vertex cover of size |V| - k.

Suppose that G contains a clique V V with |V| = k. We claim that
V - V is a vertex cover in G. Let (u, v) be any edge in E. Then, (u, v)
E, which implies that at least one of u or v does not belong to V, since
every pair of vertices in V is connected by an edge of E. Equivalently, at
least one of u or v belongs to V - V, which means that edge (u, v) is
covered by V - V. Since (u, v) was chosen arbitrarily from E, every
edge of E is covered by a vertex in V -V. Hence the set V - V, which
has size |V| - k, forms a vertex cover for G.

Conversely, suppose that G has a vertex cover V V, where |V| =
|V| - k. Then for all u, v V, if (u, v) E, then u V or v V or both.
The contrapositive of this implication is that for all u, v V, if u V

and v V, then (u, v) E. In other words, V - V is a clique, and it has
size |V|-|V| = k.

Since VERTEX-COVER is NP-complete, we don't expect to find a
polynomial-time algorithm for finding a minimum-size vertex cover.
Section 35.1 presents a polynomial-time "approximation algorithm,"
however, which produces "approximate" solutions for the vertex-cover
problem. The size of a vertex cover produced by the algorithm is at
most twice the minimum size of a vertex cover.
Thus, you shouldn't give up hope just because a problem is NPcomplete. You might be able to design a polynomial-time approximation
algorithm that obtains near-optimal solutions, even though finding an
optimal solution is NP-complete. Chapter 35 gives several
approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems.

34.5.3 The hamiltonian-cycle problem
We now return to the hamiltonian-cycle problem defined in Section
34.2.

Theorem 34.13

The hamiltonian cycle problem is NP-complete.

Figure 34.16 The gadget used in reducing the vertex-cover problem to the hamiltonian-cycle

problem. An edge (u, v) of graph G corresponds to gadget uv in the graph G created in the

reduction. (a) The gadget, with individual vertices labeled. (b)(d) The paths highlighted in
blue are the only possible ones through the gadget that include all vertices, assuming that the

only connections from the gadget to the remainder of G are through vertices [u, v, 1], [u, v, 6],
[v, u, 1], and [v, u, 6].

Proof We first show that HAM-CYCLE NP. Given an undirected
graph G = (V, E), the certificate is the sequence of |V| vertices that

makes up the hamiltonian cycle. The verification algorithm checks that

this sequence contains each vertex in V exactly once and that with the
first vertex repeated at the end, it forms a cycle in G. That is, it checks

that there is an edge between each pair of consecutive vertices and

between the first and last vertices. This certificate can be verified in

polynomial time.

We now prove that VERTEX-COVER P HAM-CYCLE, which

shows that HAM-CYCLE is NP-complete. Given an undirected graph

G = (V, E) and an integer k, we construct an undirected graph G = (V,
E) that has a hamiltonian cycle if and only if G has a vertex cover of
size k. We assume without loss of generality that G contains no isolated
vertices (that is, every vertex in V has at least one incident edge) and
that k |V|. (If an isolated vertex belongs to a vertex cover of size k,
then there also exists a vertex cover of size k - 1, and for any graph, the
entire set V is always a vertex cover.)

Our construction uses a gadget, which is a piece of a graph that

enforces certain properties. Figure 34.16(a) shows the gadget we use.

For each edge (u, v) E, the constructed graph G contains one copy of

this gadget, which we denote by uv. We denote each vertex in uv by
[u, v, i] or [v, u, i], where 1 i 6, so that each gadget uv contains 12

vertices. Gadget uv also contains the 14 edges shown in Figure

34.16(a).

Along with the internal structure of the gadget, we enforce the

properties we want by limiting the connections between the gadget and

the remainder of the graph G that we construct. In particular, only
vertices [u, v, 1], [u, v, 6], [v, u, 1], and [v, u, 6] will have edges incident
from outside uv. Any hamiltonian cycle of G must traverse the edges

of uv in one of the three ways shown in Figures 34.16(b)(d). If the
cycle enters through vertex [u, v, 1], it must exit through vertex [u, v, 6],

and it either visits all 12 of the gadget's vertices (Figure 34.16(b)) or the

six vertices [u, v, 1] through [u, v, 6] (Figure 34.16(c)). In the latter case,
the cycle will have to reenter the gadget to visit vertices [v, u, 1] through

[v, u, 6]. Similarly, if the cycle enters through vertex [v, u, 1], it must exit
through vertex [v, u, 6], and either it visits all 12 of the gadget's vertices
(Figure 34.16(d)) or it visits the six vertices [v, u, 1] through [v, u, 6] and
reenters to visit [u, v, 1] through [u, v, 6] (Figure 34.16(c)). No other

paths through the gadget that visit all 12 vertices are possible. In

particular, it is impossible to construct two vertex-disjoint paths, one of

which connects [u, v, 1] to [v, u, 6] and the other of which connects [v, u,
1] to [u, v, 6], such that the union of the two paths contains all of the

gadget's vertices.

The only other vertices in V other than those of gadgets are selector
vertices s1, s2, ... , sk. We'll use edges incident on selector vertices in G
to select the k vertices of the cover in G.

In addition to the edges in gadgets, E contains two other types of
edges, which Figure 34.17 shows. First, for each vertex u V, edges join

pairs of gadgets in order to form a path containing all gadgets

corresponding to edges incident on u in G. We arbitrarily order the
vertices adjacent to each vertex u V as u(1), u(2), ... , u(degree(u)),
where degree(u) is the number of vertices adjacent to u. To create a path
in G through all the gadgets corresponding to edges incident on u, E
contains the edges {([u, u(i), 6], [u, u(i+1), 1]) : 1 i degree(u) - 1}. In

Figure 34.17, for example, we order the vertices adjacent to w as x, y,

z, and so graph G in part (b) of the figure includes the edges ([w, x, 6],
[w, y, 1]) and ([w, y, 6], [w, z, 1]). The vertices adjacent to x are ordered

as w, y, so that G includes the edge ([x, w, 6], [x, y, 1]). For each vertex
u V, these edges in G fill in a path containing all gadgets
corresponding to edges incident on u in G.

The intuition behind these edges is that if vertex u V belongs to the

vertex cover of G, then G contains a path from [u, u(1), 1] to [u,
u(degree(u)), 6] that "covers" all gadgets corresponding to edges

incident on u. That is, for each of these gadgets, say , the path

either includes all 12 vertices (if u belongs to the vertex cover but u(i)

does not) or just the six vertices [u, u(i), 1] through [u, u(i), 6] (if both u

and u(i) belong to the vertex cover).

The final type of edge in E joins the first vertex [u, u(1), 1] and the
last vertex [u, u(degree(u)), 6] of each of these paths to each of the
selector vertices. That is, E includes the edges
{(sj, [u, u(1), 1]) : u V and 1 j k}

{(sj, [u, u(degree(u)), 6]) : u V and 1 j
k}.

Figure 34.17 Reducing an instance of the vertex-cover problem to an instance of the

hamiltonian-cycle problem. (a) An undirected graph G with a vertex cover of size 2, consisting
of the blue vertices w and y. (b) The undirected graph G produced by the reduction, with the
hamiltonian cycle corresponding to the vertex cover highlighted in blue. The vertex cover {w,
y} corresponds to edges (s1, [w, x, 1]) and (s2, [y, x, 1]) appearing in the hamiltonian cycle.

Next we show that the size of G is polynomial in the size of G, and
hence it takes time polynomial in the size of G to construct G. The
vertices of G are those in the gadgets, plus the selector vertices. With

12 vertices per gadget, plus k |V | selector vertices, G contains a total

of

|V| = 12 |E| + k
12 |E| + |V|

vertices. The edges of G are those in the gadgets, those that go between

gadgets, and those connecting selector vertices to gadgets. Each gadget

contains 14 edges, totaling 14 |E| in all gadgets. For each vertex u V,
graph G has degree(u) - 1 edges going between gadgets, so that
summed over all vertices in V,

edges go between gadgets. Finally, G has two edges for each pair
consisting of a selector vertex and a vertex of V, totaling 2k |V| such
edges. The total number of edges of G is therefore

|E| = (14 |E|) + (2 |E| - |V|) + (2k |V|)
= 16 |E| + (2k - 1) |V|
16 |E| + (2 |V| - 1) |V|.

Now we show that the transformation from graph G to G is a
reduction. That is, we must show that G has a vertex cover of size k if
and only if G has a hamiltonian cycle.

Suppose that G = (V, E) has a vertex cover V* V, where |V*| = k.
Let V* = {u1, u2, ... , uk}. As Figure 34.17 shows, we can construct a
hamiltonian cycle in G by including the following edges11 for each
vertex uj V*. Start by including edges

, which connect all gadgets

corresponding to edges incident on uj. Also include the edges within

these gadgets as Figures 34.16(b)(d) show, depending on whether the

edge is covered by one or two vertices in V*. The hamiltonian cycle also

includes the edges

By inspecting Figure 34.17, you can verify that these edges form a cycle,

where u1 = w and u2 = y. The cycle starts at s1, visits all gadgets
corresponding to edges incident on u1, then visits s2, visits all gadgets
corresponding to edges incident on u2, and so on, until it returns to s1.

The cycle visits each gadget either once or twice, depending on whether

one or two vertices of V* cover its corresponding edge. Because V* is a
vertex cover for G, each edge in E is incident on some vertex in V*, and
so the cycle visits each vertex in each gadget of G. Because the cycle

also visits every selector vertex, it is hamiltonian.

Conversely, suppose that G = (V, E) contains a hamiltonian cycle C
E. We claim that the set

is a vertex cover for G.
We first argue that the set V* is well defined, that is, for each selector

vertex sj, exactly one of the incident edges in the hamiltonian cycle C is
of the form (sj, [u, u(1), 1]) for some vertex u V. To see why, partition
the hamiltonian cycle C into maximal paths that start at some selector
vertex si, visit one or more gadgets, and end at some selector vertex sj

without passing through any other selector vertex. Let's call each of

these maximal paths a "cover path." Let P be one such cover path, and
orient it going from si to sj. If P contains the edge (si, [u, u(1), 1]) for
some vertex u V, then we have shown that one edge incident on si has
the required form. Assume, then, that P contains the edge (si, [v,
v(degree(v)), 6]) for some vertex v V. This path enters a gadget from

the bottom, as drawn in Figures 34.16 and 34.17, and it leaves from the
top. It might go through several gadgets, but it always enters from the
bottom of a gadget and leaves from the top. The only edges incident on

vertices at the top of a gadget either go to the bottoms of other gadgets

or to selector vertices. Therefore, after the last gadget in the series of

gadgets visited by P, the edge taken must go to a selector vertex sj, so
that P contains an edge of the form (sj, [u, u(1), 1]), where [u, u(1), 1] is a

vertex at the top of some gadget. To see that not both edges incident on

sj have this form, simply reverse the direction of traversing P in the

above argument.

Having established that the set V* is well defined, let's see why it is a
vertex cover for G. We have already established that each cover path
starts at some si, takes the edge (si, [u, u(1), 1]) for some vertex u V,
passes through all the gadgets corresponding to edges in E incident on
u, and then ends at some selector vertex sj. (This orientation is the

reverse of the orientation in the paragraph above.) Let's call this cover

path Pu, and by equation (34.4), the vertex cover V* includes u. Each
gadget visited by Pu must be uv or vu for some v V. For each
gadget visited by Pu, its vertices are visited by either one or two cover
paths. If they are visited by one cover path, then edge (u, v) E is
covered in G by vertex u. If two cover paths visit the gadget, then the
other cover path must be Pv, which implies that v V*, and edge (u, v)
E is covered by both u and v. Because each vertex in each gadget is
visited by some cover path, we see that each edge in E is covered by
some vertex in V*.

34.5.4 The traveling-salesperson problem

In the traveling-salesperson problem, which is closely related to the
hamiltonian-cycle problem, a salesperson must visit n cities. Let's model
the problem as a complete graph with n vertices, so that the salesperson
wishes to make a tour, or hamiltonian cycle, visiting each city exactly

once and finishing at the starting city. The salesperson incurs a

nonnegative integer cost c(i, j) to travel from city i to city j. In the

optimization version of the problem, the salesperson wishes to make the

tour whose total cost is minimum, where the total cost is the sum of the

individual costs along the edges of the tour. For example, in Figure

34.18, a minimum-cost tour is u, w, v, x, u, with cost 7. The formal

language for the corresponding decision problem is

Figure 34.18 An instance of the traveling-salesperson problem. Edges highlighted in blue
represent a minimum-cost tour, with cost 7.

TSP = {G, c, G = (V, E) is a complete graph,
k:

c is a function from V × V ,
k , and
G has a traveling-salesperson tour with cost at most
k}.

The following theorem shows that a fast algorithm for the travelingsalesperson problem is unlikely to exist.

Theorem 34.14

The traveling-salesperson problem is NP-complete.

Proof We first show that TSP NP. Given an instance of the problem,
the certificate is the sequence of n vertices in the tour. The verification

algorithm checks that this sequence contains each vertex exactly once,

sums up the edge costs, and checks that the sum is at most k. This

process can certainly be done in polynomial time.
To prove that TSP is NP-hard, we show that HAM-CYCLE P TSP.

Given an instance G = (V, E) of HAM-CYCLE, construct an instance
of TSP by forming the complete graph G = (V, E), where E = {(i, j) : i,
j V and i j }, with the cost function c defined as

(Because G is undirected, it contains no self-loops, and so c(v, v) = 1 for
all vertices v V.) The instance of TSP is then G, c, 0, which can be

created in polynomial time.

We now show that graph G has a hamiltonian cycle if and only if
graph G has a tour of cost at most 0. Suppose that graph G has a
hamiltonian cycle H. Each edge in H belongs to E and thus has cost 0 in
G. Thus, H is a tour in G with cost 0. Conversely, suppose that graph G
has a tour H of cost at most 0. Since the costs of the edges in E are 0
and 1, the cost of tour H is exactly 0 and each edge on the tour must
have cost 0. Therefore, H contains only edges in E. We conclude that H
is a hamiltonian cycle in graph G.

34.5.5 The subset-sum problem

We next consider an arithmetic NP-complete problem. The subset-sum
problem takes as inputs a finite set S of positive integers and an integer
target t > 0. It asks whether there exists a subset S S whose elements
sum to exactly t. For example, if S = {1, 2, 7, 14, 49, 98, 343, 686, 2409,
2793, 16808, 17206, 117705, 117993} and t = 138457, then the subset S

= {1, 2, 7, 98, 343, 686, 2409, 17206, 117705} is a solution.
As usual, we express the problem as a language:

SUBSET-SUM = {S, t : there exists a subset S S such that t =
sS S}.

As with any arithmetic problem, it is important to recall that our
standard encoding assumes that the input integers are coded in binary.
With this assumption in mind, we can show that the subset-sum
problem is unlikely to have a fast algorithm.

Theorem 34.15

The subset-sum problem is NP-complete.

Proof To show that SUBSET-SUM NP, for an instance S, t of the
problem, let the subset S be the certificate. A verification algorithm can
check whether t = sS S in polynomial time.

We now show that 3-CNF-SAT P SUBSET-SUM. Given a 3-CNF

formula over variables x1, x2, ... , xn with clauses C1, C2, ... , Ck,

each containing exactly three distinct literals, the reduction algorithm

constructs an instance S, t of the subset-sum problem such that is
satisfiable if and only if there exists a subset of S whose sum is exactly t.

Without loss of generality, we make two simplifying assumptions about

the formula . First, no clause contains both a variable and its

negation, for such a clause is automatically satisfied by any assignment

of values to the variables. Second, each variable appears in at least one

clause, because it does not matter what value is assigned to a variable

that appears in no clauses.

The reduction creates two numbers in set S for each variable xi and
two numbers in S for each clause Cj. The numbers will be represented in
base 10, with each number containing n + k digits and each digit

corresponding to either one variable or one clause. Base 10 (and other

bases, as we shall see) has the property we need of preventing carries

from lower digits to higher digits.

Figure 34.19 The reduction of 3-CNF-SAT to SUBSET-SUM. The formula in 3-CNF is =

C1C2C3C4, where C1 = (x1¬x2¬x3), C2 = (¬x1¬x2¬x3), C3 = (¬x1¬x2x3),
and C4 = (x1 x2 x3). A satisfying assignment of is x1 = 0, x2 = 0, x3 = 1. The set S

produced by the reduction consists of the base-10 numbers shown: reading from top to bottom,

S = {1001001, 1000110, 100001, 101110, 10011, 11100, 1000, 2000, 100, 200, 10, 20, 1, 2}.

The target t is 1114444. The subset S S is shaded blue, and it contains , and v3,

corresponding to the satisfying assignment. Subset S also contains slack variables s1, ,

s3, s4, and to achieve the target value of 4 in the digits labeled by C1 through C4.

As Figure 34.19 shows, we construct set S and target t as follows.

Label each digit position by either a variable or a clause. The least

significant k digits are labeled by the clauses, and the most significant n

digits are labeled by variables.

The target t has a 1 in each digit labeled by a variable and a 4 in

each digit labeled by a clause.

For each variable xi, set S contains two integers vi and . Each of
vi and has a 1 in the digit labeled by xi and 0s in the other
variable digits. If literal xi appears in clause Cj, then the digit

labeled by Cj in vi contains a 1. If literal ¬xi appears in clause Cj,
then the digit labeled by Cj in contains a 1. All other digits
labeled by clauses in vi and are 0.

All vi and values in set S are unique. Why? For i, no v or
values can equal vi and in the most significant n digits.
Furthermore, by our simplifying assumptions above, no vi and
can be equal in all k least significant digits. If vi and were equal,
then xi and ¬xi would have to appear in exactly the same set of
clauses. But we assume that no clause contains both xi and ¬xi
and that either xi or ¬xi appears in some clause, and so there
must be some clause Cj for which vi and differ.

For each clause Cj, set S contains two integers sj and . Each of sj
and has 0s in all digits other than the one labeled by Cj. For sj,
there is a 1 in the Cj digit, and has a 2 in this digit. These

integers are "slack variables," which we use to get each clause-
labeled digit position to add to the target value of 4.

Simple inspection of Figure 34.19 demonstrates that all sj and
values in S are unique in set S.

The greatest sum of digits in any one digit position is 6, which occurs

in the digits labeled by clauses (three 1s from the vi and values, plus 1
and 2 from the sj and values). Interpreting these numbers in base 10,

therefore, no carries can occur from lower digits to higher digits.12

The reduction can be performed in polynomial time. The set S
consists of 2n + 2k values, each of which has n + k digits, and the time
to produce each digit is polynomial in n + k. The target t has n + k

digits, and the reduction produces each in constant time.

Let's now show that the 3-CNF formula is satisfiable if and only if

there exists a subset S S whose sum is t. First, suppose that has a
satisfying assignment. For i = 1, 2, ... , n, if xi = 1 in this assignment,

then include vi in S. Otherwise, include . In other words, S includes

exactly the vi and values that correspond to literals with the value 1 in

the satisfying assignment. Having included either vi or , but not both,

for all i, and having put 0 in the digits labeled by variables in all sj and ,

we see that for each variable-labeled digit, the sum of the values of S

must be 1, which matches those digits of the target t. Because each

clause is satisfied, the clause contains some literal with the value 1.

Therefore, each digit labeled by a clause has at least one 1 contributed

to its sum by a vi or value in S. In fact, one, two, or three literals may

be 1 in each clause, and so each clause-labeled digit has a sum of 1, 2, or

3 from the vi and values in S. In Figure 34.19 for example, literals

¬x1, ¬x2, and x3 have the value 1 in a satisfying assignment. Each of

clauses C1 and C4 contains exactly one of these literals, and so together

, and v3 contribute 1 to the sum in the digits for C1 and C4. Clause

C2 contains two of these literals, and , and v3 contribute 2 to the

sum in the digit for C2. Clause C3 contains all three of these literals,

and , and v3 contribute 3 to the sum in the digit for C3. To achieve

the target of 4 in each digit labeled by clause Cj, include in S the

appropriate nonempty subset of slack variables {sj, }. In Figure 34.19,

S includes s1, , s3, s4, and . Since S matches the target in all digits

of the sum, and no carries can occur, the values of S sum to t.

Now suppose that some subset S S sums to t. The subset S must

include exactly one of vi and for each i = 1, 2, ... , n, for otherwise the

digits labeled by variables would not sum to 1. If vi S, then set xi = 1.

Otherwise, , and set xi = 0. We claim that every clause Cj, for j =

1, 2, ... , k, is satisfied by this assignment. To prove this claim, note that

to achieve a sum of 4 in the digit labeled by Cj, the subset S must

include at least one vi or value that has a 1 in the digit labeled by Cj,

since the contributions of the slack variables sj and together sum to at

most 3. If S includes a that has a 1 in Cj's position, then the literal xi

appears in clause Cj. Since xi = 1 when vi S, clause Cj is satisfied. If S
includes a that has a 1 in that position, then the literal ¬xi appears in
Cj. Since xi = 0 when S, clause Cj is again satisfied. Thus, all clauses

of are satisfied, which completes the proof.

34.5.6 Reduction strategies

From the reductions in this section, you can see that no single strategy
applies to all NP-complete problems. Some reductions are
straightforward, such as reducing the hamiltonian-cycle problem to the
traveling-salesperson problem. Others are considerably more
complicated. Here are a few things to keep in mind and some strategies
that you can often bring to bear.

Pitfalls

Make sure that you don't get the reduction backward. That is, in trying

to show that problem Y is NP-complete, you might take a known NPcomplete problem X and give a polynomial-time reduction from Y to X.
That is the wrong direction. The reduction should be from X to Y, so
that a solution to Y gives a solution to X.

Remember also that reducing a known NP-complete problem X to a
problem Y does not in itself prove that Y is NP-complete. It proves that
Y is NP-hard. In order to show that Y is NP-complete, you additionally
need to prove that it's in NP by showing how to verify a certificate for Y

in polynomial time.

Go from general to specific

When reducing problem X to problem Y, you always have to start with
an arbitrary input to problem X. But you are allowed to restrict the
input to problem Y as much as you like. For example, when reducing 3-

CNF satisfiability to the subset-sum problem, the reduction had to be

able to handle any 3-CNF formula as its input, but the input to the
subset-sum problem that it produced had a particular structure: 2n + 2k

integers in the set, and each integer was formed in a particular way. The

reduction did not need to produce every possible input to the subset-

sum problem. The point is that one way to solve the 3-CNF satisfiability
problem transforms the input into an input to the subset-sum problem
and then uses the answer to the subset-sum problem as the answer to
the 3-CNF satisfiability problem.

Take advantage of structure in the problem you are reducing from

When you are choosing a problem to reduce from, you might consider
two problems in the same domain, but one problem has more structure
than the other. For example, it's almost always much easier to reduce
from 3-CNF satisfiability than to reduce from formula satisfiability.
Boolean formulas can be arbitrarily complicated, but you can exploit
the structure of 3-CNF formulas when reducing.

Likewise, it is usually more straightforward to reduce from the
hamiltonian-cycle problem than from the traveling-salesperson
problem, even though they are so similar. That's because you can view
the hamiltonian-cycle problem as taking a complete graph but with
edge weights of just 0 or 1, as they would appear in the adjacency
matrix. In that sense, the hamiltonian-cycle problem has more structure
than the traveling-salesperson problem, in which edge weights are
unrestricted.

Look for special cases

Several NP-complete problems are just special cases of other NPcomplete problems. For example, consider the decision version of the 0-

1 knapsack problem: given a set of n items, each with a weight and a

value, does there exist a subset of items whose total weight is at most a

given weight W and whose total value is at least a given value V? You

can view the set-partition problem in Exercise 34.5-5 as a special case of
the 0-1 knapsack problem: let the value of each item equal its weight,

and set both W and V to half the total weight. If problem X is NP-hard
and it is a special case of problem Y, then problem Y must be NP-hard
as well. That is because a polynomial-time solution for problem Y
automatically gives a polynomial-time solution for problem X. More

intuitively, problem Y, being more general than problem X, is at least as

hard.

Select an appropriate problem to reduce from

It's often a good strategy to reduce from a problem in a domain that is
the same as, or at least related to, the domain of the problem that you're
trying to prove NP-complete. For example, we saw that the vertex-cover
problem--a graph problem--was NP-hard by reducing from the clique
problem--also a graph problem. From the vertex-cover problem, we
reduced to the hamiltonian-cycle problem, and from the hamiltoniancycle problem, we reduced to the traveling-salesperson problem. All of
these problems take undirected graphs as inputs.

Sometimes, however, you will find that is it better to cross over from
one domain to another, such as when we reduced from 3-CNF
satisfiability to the clique problem or to the subset-sum problem. 3-CNF
satisfiability often turns out to be a good choice as a problem to reduce
from when crossing domains.

Within graph problems, if you need to select a portion of the graph,
without regard to ordering, then the vertex-cover problem is often a
good place to start. If ordering matters, then consider starting from the
hamiltonian-cycle or hamiltonian-path problem (see Exercise 34.5-6).

Make big rewards and big penalties

The strategy for reducing the hamiltonian-cycle problem with a graph G

to the traveling-salesperson problem encouraged using edges present in

G when choosing edges for the traveling-salesperson tour. The

reduction did so by giving these edges a low weight: 0. In other words,
we gave a big reward for using these edges.

Alternatively, the reduction could have given the edges in G a finite
weight and given edges not in G infinite weight, thereby exacting a hefty
penalty for using edges not in G. With this approach, if each edge in G
has weight W, then the target weight of the traveling-salesperson tour
becomes W · |V|. You can sometimes think of the penalties as a way to

enforce requirements. For example, if the traveling-salesperson tour

includes an edge with infinite weight, then it violates the requirement

that the tour should include only edges belonging to G.

Design gadgets

The reduction from the vertex-cover problem to the hamiltonian-cycle
problem uses the gadget shown in Figure 34.16. This gadget is a
subgraph that is connected to other parts of the constructed graph in
order to restrict the ways that a cycle can visit each vertex in the gadget
once. More generally, a gadget is a component that enforces certain
properties. Gadgets can be complicated, as in the reduction to the
hamiltonian-cycle problem. Or they can be simple: in the reduction of 3CNF satisfiability to the subset-sum problem, you can view the slack

variables sj and as gadgets enabling each clause-labeled digit position

to achieve the target value of 4.

Exercises

34.5-1
The subgraph-isomorphism problem takes two undirected graphs G1 and
G2, and asks whether G1 is isomorphic to a subgraph of G2. Show that

the subgraph-isomorphism problem is NP-complete.

34.5-2
Given an integer m × n matrix A and an integer m-vector b, the 0-1
integer-programming problem asks whether there exists an integer nvector x with elements in the set {0, 1} such that Ax b. Prove that 0-1
integer programming is NP-complete. (Hint: Reduce from 3-CNF-SAT.)

34.5-3
The integer linear-programming problem is like the 0-1 integer-

programming problem given in Exercise 34.5-2, except that the values

of the vector x may be any integers rather than just 0 or 1. Assuming

that the 0-1 integer-programming problem is NP-hard, show that the
integer linear-programming problem is NP-complete.

34.5-4

Show how to solve the subset-sum problem in polynomial time if the

target value t is expressed in unary.

34.5-5
The set-partition problem takes as input a set S of numbers. The
question is whether the numbers can be partitioned into two sets A and
A = S - A such that xA x = xA x. Show that the set-partition

problem is NP-complete.

34.5-6

Show that the hamiltonian-path problem is NP-complete.

34.5-7
The longest-simple-cycle problem is the problem of determining a simple

cycle (no repeated vertices) of maximum length in a graph. Formulate a
related decision problem, and show that the decision problem is NPcomplete.

34.5-8
In the half 3-CNF satisfiability problem, the input is a 3-CNF formula
with n variables and m clauses, where m is even. The question is whether

there exists a truth assignment to the variables of such that exactly
half the clauses evaluate to 0 and exactly half the clauses evaluate to 1.
Prove that the half 3-CNF satisfiability problem is NP-complete.

34.5-9

The proof that VERTEX-COVER P HAM-CYCLE assumes that the

graph G given as input to the vertex-cover problem has no isolated
vertices. Show how the reduction in the proof can break down if G has

an isolated vertex.

Problems

34-1 Independent set

An independent set of a graph G = (V, E) is a subset V V of vertices
such that each edge in E is incident on at most one vertex in V. The
independent-set problem is to find a maximum-size independent set in G.

a. Formulate a related decision problem for the independent-set
problem, and prove that it is NP-complete. (Hint: Reduce from the

clique problem.)

b. You are given a "black-box" subroutine to solve the decision problem

you defined in part (a). Give an algorithm to find an independent set
of maximum size. The running time of your algorithm should be

polynomial in |V | and |E|, counting queries to the black box as a

single step.

Although the independent-set decision problem is NP-complete, certain
special cases are polynomial-time solvable.

c. Give an efficient algorithm to solve the independent-set problem
when each vertex in G has degree 2. Analyze the running time, and

prove that your algorithm works correctly.

d. Give an efficient algorithm to solve the independent-set problem
when G is bipartite. Analyze the running time, and prove that your
algorithm works correctly. (Hint: First prove that in a bipartite graph,

the size of the maximimum independent set plus the size of the

maximum matching is equal to |V|. Then use a maximum-matching

algorithm (see Section 25.1) as a first step in an algorithm to find an
independent set.)

34-2 Bonnie and Clyde

Bonnie and Clyde have just robbed a bank. They have a bag of money
and want to divide it up. For each of the following scenarios, either give
a polynomial-time algorithm to divide the money or prove that the
problem of dividing the money in the manner described is NP-complete.

The input in each case is a list of the n items in the bag, along with the

value of each.

a. The bag contains n coins, but only two different denominations: some
coins are worth x dollars, and some are worth y dollars. Bonnie and

Clyde wish to divide the money exactly evenly.

b. The bag contains n coins, with an arbitrary number of different

denominations, but each denomination is a nonnegative exact power
of 2, so that the possible denominations are 1 dollar, 2 dollars, 4
dollars, etc. Bonnie and Clyde wish to divide the money exactly
evenly.

c. The bag contains n checks, which are, in an amazing coincidence,

made out to "Bonnie or Clyde." They wish to divide the checks so
that they each get the exact same amount of money.

d. The bag contains n checks as in part (c), but this time Bonnie and

Clyde are willing to accept a split in which the difference is no larger
than 100 dollars.

34-3 Graph coloring

Mapmakers try to use as few colors as possible when coloring countries
on a map, subject to the restriction that if two countries share a border,
they must have different colors. You can model this problem with an

undirected graph G = (V, E) in which each vertex represents a country

and vertices whose respective countries share a border are adjacent.

Then, a k-coloring is a function c : V {1, 2, ... , k} such that c(u)
c(v) for every edge (u, v) E. In other words, the numbers 1, 2, ... , k
represent the k colors, and adjacent vertices must have different colors.
The graph-coloring problem is to determine the minimum number of

colors needed to color a given graph.

a. Give an efficient algorithm to determine a 2-coloring of a graph, if

one exists.

b. Cast the graph-coloring problem as a decision problem. Show that

your decision problem is solvable in polynomial time if and only if the
graph-coloring problem is solvable in polynomial time.

c. Let the language 3-COLOR be the set of graphs that can be 3-

colored. Show that if 3-COLOR is NP-complete, then your decision
problem from part (b) is NP-complete.

Figure 34.20 The subgraph of G in Problem 34-3 formed by the literal edges. The special
vertices TRUE, FALSE, and RED form a triangle, and for each variable xi, the vertices xi,
¬xi, and RED form a triangle.

Figure 34.21 The gadget corresponding to a clause (x y z), used in Problem 34-3.

To prove that 3-COLOR is NP-complete, you can reduce from 3-CNF-

SAT. Given a formula of m clauses on n variables x1, x2, ... , xn,
construct a graph G = (V, E) as follows. The set V consists of a vertex

for each variable, a vertex for the negation of each variable, five vertices
for each clause, and three special vertices: TRUE, FALSE, and RED.
The edges of the graph are of two types: "literal" edges that are
independent of the clauses and "clause" edges that depend on the
clauses. As Figure 34.20 shows, the literal edges form a triangle on the
three special vertices TRUE, FALSE, and RED, and they also form a

triangle on xi, ¬xi, and RED for i = 1, 2, ... , n.

d. Consider a graph containing the literal edges. Argue that in any 3-
coloring c of such a graph, exactly one of a variable and its negation
is colored c(TRUE) and the other is colored c(FALSE). Then argue

that for any truth assignment for , there exists a 3-coloring of the
graph containing just the literal edges.

The gadget shown in Figure 34.21 helps to enforce the condition

corresponding to a clause (x y z), where x, y, and z are literals. Each

clause requires a unique copy of the five blue vertices in the figure. They
connect as shown to the literals of the clause and the special vertex
TRUE.

e. Argue that if each of x, y, and z is colored c(TRUE) or c(FALSE),
then the gadget is 3-colorable if and only if at least one of x, y, or z is
colored c(TRUE).

f. Complete the proof that 3-COLOR is NP-complete.

34-4 Scheduling with profits and deadlines
You have one computer and a set of n tasks {a1, a2, ... , an} requiring
time on the computer. Each task aj requires tj time units on the
computer (its processing time), yields a profit of pj, and has a deadline
dj. The computer can process only one task at a time, and task aj must
run without interruption for tj consecutive time units. If task aj
completes by its deadline dj, you receive a profit pj. If instead task aj

completes after its deadline, you receive no profit. As an optimization

problem, given the processing times, profits, and deadlines for a set of n

tasks, you wish to find a schedule that completes all the tasks and
returns the greatest amount of profit. The processing times, profits, and
deadlines are all nonnegative numbers.

a. State this problem as a decision problem.

b. Show that the decision problem is NP-complete.

c. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the decision problem, assuming
that all processing times are integers from 1 to n. (Hint: Use dynamic

programming.)

d. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the optimization problem,
assuming that all processing times are integers from 1 to n.

Chapter notes

The book by Garey and Johnson [176] provides a wonderful guide to
NP-completeness, discussing the theory at length and providing a
catalogue of many problems that were known to be NP-complete in
1979. The proof of Theorem 34.13 is adapted from their book, and the
list of NP-complete problem domains at the beginning of Section 34.5 is
drawn from their table of contents. Johnson wrote a series of 23

columns in the Journal of Algorithms between 1981 and 1992 reporting

new developments in NP-completeness. Fortnow's book [152] gives a
history of NP-completeness, along with societal implications. Hopcroft,
Motwani, and Ullman [225], Lewis and Papadimitriou [299],
Papadimitriou [352], and Sipser [413] have good treatments of NPcompleteness in the context of complexity theory. NP-completeness and
several reductions also appear in books by Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman
[5], Dasgupta, Papadimitriou, and Vazirani [107], Johnsonbaugh and
Schaefer [239], and Kleinberg and Tardos [257]. The book by
Hromkovic [229] studies various methods for solving hard problems.

The class P was introduced in 1964 by Cobham [96] and,
independently, in 1965 by Edmonds [130], who also introduced the class
NP and conjectured that P NP. The notion of NP-completeness was
proposed in 1971 by Cook [100], who gave the first NP-completeness
proofs for formula satisfiability and 3-CNF satisfiability. Levin [297]
independently discovered the notion, giving an NP-completeness proof
for a tiling problem. Karp [248] introduced the methodology of
reductions in 1972 and demonstrated the rich variety of NP-complete
problems. Karp's paper included the original NP-completeness proofs
of the clique, vertex-cover, and hamiltonian-cycle problems. Since then,
thousands of problems have been proven to be NP-complete by many
researchers.

Work in complexity theory has shed light on the complexity of
computing approximate solutions. This work gives a new definition of
NP using "probabilistically checkable proofs." This new definition
implies that for problems such as clique, vertex cover, the travelingsalesperson problem with the triangle inequality, and many others,
computing good approximate solutions (see Chapter 35) is NP-hard
and hence no easier than computing optimal solutions. An introduction
to this area can be found in Arora's thesis [21], a chapter by Arora and
Lund in Hochbaum [221], a survey article by Arora [22], a book edited
by Mayr, Prömel, and Steger [319], a survey article by Johnson [237],
and a chapter in the textbook by Arora and Barak [24].

1 For the Halting Problem and other unsolvable problems, there are proofs that no algorithm
can exist that, for every input, eventually produces the correct answer. A procedure attempting
to solve an unsolvable problem might always produce an answer but is sometimes incorrect, or
all the answers it produces might be correct but for some inputs it never produces an answer.

2 See the books by Hopcroft and Ullman [228], Lewis and Papadimitriou [299], or Sipser [413]
for a thorough treatment of the Turing-machine model.

3 The codomain of e need not be binary strings: any set of strings over a finite alphabet having

at least two symbols will do.

4 We assume that the algorithm's output is separate from its input. Because it takes at least

one time step to produce each bit of the output and the algorithm takes O(T (n)) time steps, the
size of the output is O(T (n)).

5 The notation {0, 1}* denotes the set of all strings composed of symbols from the set {0, 1}.

6 Technically, we also require the functions f12 and f21 to "map noninstances to
noninstances." A noninstance of an encoding e is a string x {0, 1}* such that there is no
instance i for which e(i) = x. We require that f12(x) = y for every noninstance x of encoding
e1, where y is some noninstance of e2, and that f21(x) = y for every noninstance x of e2,
where y is some noninstance of e1.

7 For more on complexity classes, see the seminal paper by Hartmanis and Stearns [210].

8 In a letter dated 17 October 1856 to his friend John T. Graves, Hamilton [206, p. 624] wrote,
"I have found that some young persons have been much amused by trying a new mathematical
game which the Icosion furnishes, one person sticking five pins in any five consecutive points
... and the other player then aiming to insert, which by the theory in this letter can always be
done, fifteen other pins, in cyclical succession, so as to cover all the other points, and to end in
immediate proximity to the pin wherewith his antagonist had begun."

9 The name "NP" stands for "nondeterministic polynomial time." The class NP was originally
studied in the context of nondeterminism, but this book uses the somewhat simpler yet
equivalent notion of verification. Hopcroft and Ullman [228] give a good presentation of NPcompleteness in terms of nondeterministic models of computation.

10 On the other hand, if the size of the circuit C is (2k), then an algorithm whose running
time is O(2k) has a running time that is polynomial in the circuit size. Even if P NP, this

situation would not contradict the NP-completeness of the problem. The existence of a
polynomial-time algorithm for a special case does not imply that there is a polynomial-time
algorithm for all cases.

11 Technically, a cycle is defined as a sequence of vertices rather than edges (see Section B.4).
In the interest of clarity, we abuse notation here and define the hamiltonian cycle by its edges.

12 In fact, any base b 7 works. The instance at the beginning of this subsection is the set S
and target t in Figure 34.19 interpreted in base 7, with S listed in sorted order.

35 Approximation Algorithms

Many problems of practical significance are NP-complete, yet they are
too important to abandon merely because nobody knows how to find
an optimal solution in polynomial time. Even if a problem is NPcomplete, there may be hope. You have at least three options to get
around NP-completeness. First, if the actual inputs are small, an
algorithm with exponential running time might be fast enough. Second,
you might be able to isolate important special cases that you can solve
in polynomial time. Third, you can try to devise an approach to find a

near-optimal solution in polynomial time (either in the worst case or the

expected case). In practice, near-optimality is often good enough. We

call an algorithm that returns near-optimal solutions an approximation
algorithm. This chapter presents polynomial-time approximation

algorithms for several NP-complete problems.

Performance ratios for approximation algorithms

Suppose that you are working on an optimization problem in which
each potential solution has a positive cost, and you want to find a nearoptimal solution. Depending on the problem, you could define an
optimal solution as one with maximum possible cost or as one with
minimum possible cost, which is to say that the problem might be either
a maximization or a minimization problem.

We say that an algorithm for a problem has an approximation ratio of
(n) if, for any input of size n, the cost C of the solution produced by

the algorithm is within a factor of (n) of the cost C* of an optimal

solution:

If an algorithm achieves an approximation ratio of (n), we call it a
(n)-approximation algorithm. The definitions of approximation ratio
and (n)-approximation algorithm apply to both minimization and
maximization problems. For a maximization problem, 0 < C C*, and
the ratio C*/C gives the factor by which the cost of an optimal solution

is larger than the cost of the approximate solution. Similarly, for a

minimization problem, 0 < C* C, and the ratio C/C* gives the factor

by which the cost of the approximate solution is larger than the cost of
an optimal solution. Because we assume that all solutions have positive
cost, these ratios are always well defined. The approximation ratio of an

approximation algorithm is never less than 1, since C/C* 1 implies
C*/C 1. Therefore, a 1-approximation algorithm1 produces an optimal

solution, and an approximation algorithm with a large approximation
ratio may return a solution that is much worse than optimal.

For many problems, we know of polynomial-time approximation
algorithms with small constant approximation ratios, although for other
problems, the best known polynomial-time approximation algorithms

have approximation ratios that grow as functions of the input size n. An

example of such a problem is the set-cover problem presented in
Section 35.3.

Some polynomial-time approximation algorithms can achieve
increasingly better approximation ratios by using more and more
computation time. For such problems, you can trade computation time
for the quality of the approximation. An example is the subset-sum
problem studied in Section 35.5. This situation is important enough to
deserve a name of its own.

An approximation scheme for an optimization problem is an

approximation algorithm that takes as input not only an instance of the
problem, but also a value > 0 such that for any fixed , the scheme is
a (1 + )-approximation algorithm. We say that an approximation

scheme is a polynomial-time approximation scheme if for any fixed > 0,
the scheme runs in time polynomial in the size n of its input instance.

The running time of a polynomial-time approximation scheme can
increase very rapidly as decreases. For example, the running time of a

polynomial-time approximation scheme might be O(n2/). Ideally, if

decreases by a constant factor, the running time to achieve the desired
approximation should not increase by more than a constant factor
(though not necessarily the same constant factor by which
decreased).

We say that an approximation scheme is a fully polynomial-time
approximation scheme if it is an approximation scheme and its running
time is polynomial in both 1/ and the size n of the input instance. For
example, the scheme might have a running time of O((1/)2n3). With

such a scheme, any constant-factor decrease in comes with a
corresponding constant-factor increase in the running time.

Chapter outline

The first four sections of this chapter present some examples of
polynomial-time approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems,
and the fifth section gives a fully polynomial-time approximation
scheme. We begin in Section 35.1 with a study of the vertex-cover
problem, an NP-complete minimization problem that has an
approximation algorithm with an approximation ratio of 2. Section 35.2
looks at a version of the traveling-salesperson problem in which the
cost function satisfies the triangle inequality and presents an
approximation algorithm with an approximation ratio of 2. The section
also shows that without the triangle inequality, for any constant 1, a
-approximation algorithm cannot exist unless P = NP. Section 35.3
applies a greedy method as an effective approximation algorithm for the
set-covering problem, obtaining a covering whose cost is at worst a
logarithmic factor larger than the optimal cost. Section 35.4 uses
randomization and linear programming to develop two more
approximation algorithms. The section first defines the optimization
version of 3-CNF satisfiability and gives a simple randomized algorithm

that produces a solution with an expected approximation ratio of 8/7.
Then Section 35.4 examines a weighted variant of the vertex-cover
problem and exhibits how to use linear programming to develop a 2approximation algorithm. Finally, Section 35.5 presents a fully
polynomial-time approximation scheme for the subset-sum problem.