35.1 The vertex-cover problem

Section 34.5.2 defined the vertex-cover problem and proved it NP-

complete. Recall that a vertex cover of an undirected graph G = (V, E) is
a subset V V such that if (u, v) is an edge of G, then either u V or v
V (or both). The size of a vertex cover is the number of vertices in it.

The vertex-cover problem is to find a vertex cover of minimum size in
a given undirected graph. We call such a vertex cover an optimal vertex
cover. This problem is the optimization version of an NP-complete

decision problem.
Even though nobody knows how to find an optimal vertex cover in a

graph G in polynomial time, there is an efficient algorithm to find a

vertex cover that is near-optimal. The approximation algorithm
APPROX-VERTEX-COVER on the facing page takes as input an

undirected graph G and returns a vertex cover whose size is guaranteed

to be no more than twice the size of an optimal vertex cover.
Figure 35.1 illustrates how APPROX-VERTEX-COVER operates on

an example graph. The variable C contains the vertex cover being
constructed. Line 1 initializes C to the empty set. Line 2 sets E to be a
copy of the edge set G.E of the graph. The while loop of lines 36
repeatedly picks an edge (u, v) from E, adds its endpoints u and v into
C, and deletes all edges in E that u or v covers. Finally, line 7 returns the
vertex cover C. The running time of this algorithm is O(V + E), using
adjacency lists to represent E.

APPROX-VERTEX-COVER (G)

1 C=Ø
2 E = G.E

3 while E Ø
4 let (u, v) be an arbitrary edge of E
5 C = C {u, v}
6 remove from E edge (u, v) and every edge incident on either u or

v
7 return C

Theorem 35.1

APPROX-VERTEX-COVER is a polynomial-time 2-approximation
algorithm.

Proof We have already shown that APPROX-VERTEX-COVER runs

in polynomial time.

The set C of vertices that is returned by APPROX-VERTEX-

COVER is a vertex cover, since the algorithm loops until every edge in

G.E has been covered by some vertex in C.

To see that APPROX-VERTEX-COVER returns a vertex cover that

is at most twice the size of an optimal cover, let A denote the set of

edges that line 4 of APPROX-VERTEX-COVER picked. In order to

cover the edges in A, any vertex cover--in particular, an optimal cover
C*--must include at least one endpoint of each edge in A. No two edges
in A share an endpoint, since once an edge is picked in line 4, all other
edges that are incident on its endpoints are deleted from E in line 6.
Thus, no two edges in A are covered by the same vertex from C*,
meaning that for every vertex in C*, there is at most one edge in A,

giving the lower bound

on the size of an optimal vertex cover. Each execution of line 4 picks an

edge for which neither of its endpoints is already in C, yielding an upper

bound (an exact upper bound, in fact) on the size of the vertex cover
returned:

Combining equations (35.2) and (35.3) yields

|C| = 2 |A|
2 |C*|,

thereby proving the theorem.

Figure 35.1 The operation of APPROX-VERTEX-COVER. (a) The input graph G, which has
7 vertices and 8 edges. (b) The highlighted edge (b, c) is the first edge chosen by APPROXVERTEX-COVER. Vertices b and c, in blue, are added to the set C containing the vertex
cover being created. Dashed edges (a, b), (c, e), and (c, d) are removed since they are now
covered by some vertex in C. (c) Edge (e, f) is chosen, and vertices e and f are added to C. (d)
Edge (d, g) is chosen, and vertices d and g are added to C. (e) The set C, which is the vertex
cover produced by APPROX-VERTEX-COVER, contains the six vertices b, c, d, e, f, g. (f)
The optimal vertex cover for this problem contains only three vertices: b, d, and e.

Let us reflect on this proof. At first, you might wonder how you can
possibly prove that the size of the vertex cover returned by APPROXVERTEX-COVER is at most twice the size of an optimal vertex cover,
when you don't even know the size of an optimal vertex cover. Instead
of requiring that you know the exact size of an optimal vertex cover,
you find a lower bound on the size. As Exercise 35.1-2 asks you to show,

the set A of edges that line 4 of APPROX-VERTEX-COVER selects is

actually a maximal matching in the graph G. (A maximal matching is a

matching to which no edges can be added and still have a matching.)
The size of a maximal matching is, as we argued in the proof of
Theorem 35.1, a lower bound on the size of an optimal vertex cover.
The algorithm returns a vertex cover whose size is at most twice the size

of the maximal matching A. The approximation ratio comes from

relating the size of the solution returned to the lower bound. We will use
this methodology in later sections as well.

Exercises

35.1-1

Give an example of a graph for which APPROX-VERTEX-COVER
always yields a suboptimal solution.

35.1-2

Prove that the set of edges picked in line 4 of APPROX-VERTEX-

COVER forms a maximal matching in the graph G.

35.1-3

Consider the following heuristic to solve the vertex-cover problem.
Repeatedly select a vertex of highest degree, and remove all of its
incident edges. Give an example to show that this heuristic does not

provide an approximation ratio of 2. (Hint: Try a bipartite graph with

vertices of uniform degree on the left and vertices of varying degree on
the right.)

35.1-4

Give an efficient greedy algorithm that finds an optimal vertex cover for
a tree in linear time.

35.1-5

The proof of Theorem 34.12 on page 1084 illustrates that the vertexcover problem and the NP-complete clique problem are complementary
in the sense that an optimal vertex cover is the complement of a
maximum-size clique in the complement graph. Does this relationship
imply that there is a polynomial-time approximation algorithm with a

constant approximation ratio for the clique problem? Justify your
answer.