35.2 The traveling-salesperson problem

The input to the traveling-salesperson problem, introduced in Section

34.5.4, is a complete undirected graph G = (V, E) that has a nonnegative
integer cost c(u, v) associated with each edge (u, v) E. The goal is to
find a hamiltonian cycle (a tour) of G with minimum cost. As an
extension of our notation, let c(A) denote the total cost of the edges in
the subset A E:

In many practical situations, the least costly way to go from a place u
to a place w is to go directly, with no intermediate steps. Put another

way, cutting out an intermediate stop never increases the cost. Such a

cost function c satisfies the triangle inequality: for all vertices u, v, w V,
c(u, w) c(u, v) + c(v, w).

The triangle inequality seems as though it should naturally hold, and
it is automatically satisfied in several applications. For example, if the
vertices of the graph are points in the plane and the cost of traveling
between two vertices is the ordinary euclidean distance between them,
then the triangle inequality is satisfied. Furthermore, many cost
functions other than euclidean distance satisfy the triangle inequality.

As Exercise 35.2-2 shows, the traveling-salesperson problem is NPcomplete even if you require the cost function to satisfy the triangle
inequality. Thus, you should not expect to find a polynomial-time
algorithm for solving this problem exactly. Your time would be better
spent looking for good approximation algorithms.

In Section 35.2.1, we examine a 2-approximation algorithm for the
traveling-salesperson problem with the triangle inequality. In Section
35.2.2, we show that without the triangle inequality, a polynomial-time

approximation algorithm with a constant approximation ratio does not
exist unless P = NP.

35.2.1 The traveling-salesperson problem with the triangle inequality

Applying the methodology of the previous section, start by computing
a structure--a minimum spanning tree--whose weight gives a lower
bound on the length of an optimal traveling-salesperson tour. Then use
the minimum spanning tree to create a tour whose cost is no more than
twice that of the minimum spanning tree's weight, as long as the cost
function satisfies the triangle inequality. The procedure APPROX-TSPTOUR on the next page implements this approach, calling the
minimum-spanning-tree algorithm MST-PRIM on page 596 as a

subroutine. The parameter G is a complete undirected graph, and the
cost function c satisfies the triangle inequality.

Recall from Section 12.1 that a preorder tree walk recursively visits
every vertex in the tree, listing a vertex when it is first encountered,
before visiting any of its children.

Figure 35.2 illustrates the operation of APPROX-TSP-TOUR. Part
(a) of the figure shows a complete undirected graph, and part (b) shows

the minimum spanning tree T grown from root vertex a by MST-PRIM.
Part (c) shows how a preorder walk of T visits the vertices, and part (d)

displays the corresponding tour, which is the tour returned by
APPROX-TSP-TOUR. Part (e) displays an optimal tour, which is about
23% shorter.

Figure 35.2 The operation of APPROX-TSP-TOUR. (a) A complete undirected graph.

Vertices lie on intersections of integer grid lines. For example, f is one unit to the right and two
units up from h. The cost function between two points is the ordinary euclidean distance. (b) A
minimum spanning tree T of the complete graph, as computed by MST-PRIM. Vertex a is the

root vertex. Only edges in the minimum spanning tree are shown. The vertices happen to be
labeled in such a way that they are added to the main tree by MST-PRIM in alphabetical

order. (c) A walk of T, starting at a. A full walk of the tree visits the vertices in the order a, b,
c, b, h, b, a, d, e, f, e, g, e, d, a. A preorder walk of T lists a vertex just when it is first
encountered, as indicated by the dot next to each vertex, yielding the ordering a, b, c, h, d, e, f,
g. (d) A tour obtained by visiting the vertices in the order given by the preorder walk, which is
the tour H returned by APPROX-TSP-TOUR. Its total cost is approximately 19.074. (e) An
optimal tour H* for the original complete graph. Its total cost is approximately 14.715.

APPROX-TSP-TOUR (G, c)

1 select a vertex r G.V to be a "root" vertex
2 compute a minimum spanning tree T for G from root r

using MST-PRIM (G, c, r)
3 let H be a list of vertices, ordered according to when they are first

visited in a preorder tree walk of T

4 return the hamiltonian cycle H

By Exercise 21.2-2, even with a simple implementation of MST-

PRIM, the running time of APPROX-TSP-TOUR is (V 2). We now

show that if the cost function for an instance of the travelingsalesperson problem satisfies the triangle inequality, then APPROXTSP-TOUR returns a tour whose cost is at most twice the cost of an
optimal tour.

Theorem 35.2

When the triangle inequality holds, APPROX-TSP-TOUR is a
polynomial-time 2-approximation algorithm for the travelingsalesperson problem.

Proof We have already seen that APPROX-TSP-TOUR runs in

polynomial time.

Let H* denote an optimal tour for the given set of vertices. Deleting

any edge from a tour yields a spanning tree, and each edge cost is

nonnegative. Therefore, the weight of the minimum spanning tree T

computed in line 2 of APPROX-TSP-TOUR provides a lower bound on
the cost of an optimal tour:

A full walk of T lists the vertices when they are first visited and also

whenever they are returned to after a visit to a subtree. Let's call this

full walk W. The full walk of our example gives the order
a, b, c, b, h, b, a, d, e, f, e, g, e, d, a.
Since the full walk traverses every edge of T exactly twice, by extending
the definition of the cost c in the natural manner to handle multisets of

edges, we have

Inequality (35.4) and equation (35.5) imply that

and so the cost of W is within a factor of 2 of the cost of an optimal

tour.

Of course, the full walk W is not a tour, since it visits some vertices

more than once. By the triangle inequality, however, deleting a visit to

any vertex from W does not increase the cost. (When a vertex v is
deleted from W between visits to u and w, the resulting ordering
specifies going directly from u to w.) Repeatedly apply this operation on
each visit to a vertex after the first time it's visited in W, so that W is

left with only the first visit to each vertex. In our example, this process
leaves the ordering

a, b, c, h, d, e, f, g.

This ordering is the same as that obtained by a preorder walk of the

tree T. Let H be the cycle corresponding to this preorder walk. It is a

hamiltonian cycle, since every vertex is visited exactly once, and in fact

it is the cycle computed by APPROX-TSP-TOUR. Since H is obtained
by deleting vertices from the full walk W, we have

Combining inequalities (35.6) and (35.7) gives c(H) 2c(H*), which

completes the proof.

Despite the small approximation ratio provided by Theorem 35.2,
APPROX-TSP-TOUR is usually not the best practical choice for this
problem. There are other approximation algorithms that typically
perform much better in practice. (See the references at the end of this
chapter.)

35.2.2 The general traveling-salesperson problem

When the cost function c does not satisfy the triangle inequality, there

is no way to find good approximate tours in polynomial time unless P =
NP.

Theorem 35.3

If P NP, then for any constant 1, there is no polynomial-time
approximation algorithm with approximation ratio for the general
traveling-salesperson problem.

Proof The proof is by contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that for

some number 1, there is a polynomial-time approximation algorithm

A with approximation ratio . Without loss of generality, assume that
is an integer, by rounding it up if necessary. We will show how to use A

to solve instances of the hamiltonian-cycle problem (defined in Section
34.2) in polynomial time. Since Theorem 34.13 on page 1085 says that
the hamiltonian-cycle problem is NP-complete, Theorem 34.4 on page
1063 implies that if it has a polynomial-time algorithm, then P = NP.

Let G = (V, E) be an instance of the hamiltonian-cycle problem. We
will show how to determine efficiently whether G contains a hamiltonian
cycle by making use of the hypothesized approximation algorithm A.
Convert G into an instance of the traveling-salesperson problem as
follows. Let G = (V, E) be the complete graph on V, that is,

E = {(u, v) : u, v V and u v}.

Assign an integer cost to each edge in E as follows:

Given a representation of G, it takes time polynomial in |V| and |E| to
create representations of G and c.

Now consider the traveling-salesperson problem (G, c). If the
original graph G has a hamiltonian cycle H, then the cost function c
assigns to each edge of H a cost of 1, and so (G, c) contains a tour of
cost |V|. On the other hand, if G does not contain a hamiltonian cycle,
then any tour of G must use some edge not in E. But any tour that uses
an edge not in E has a cost of at least

( |V| + 1) + (|V| - 1) = |V| + |V|
> |V|.

Because edges not in G are so costly, there is a gap of at least |V|
between the cost of a tour that is a hamiltonian cycle in G (cost |V|) and
the cost of any other tour (cost at least |V| + |V|). Therefore, the cost
of a tour that is not a hamiltonian cycle in G is at least a factor of + 1
greater than the cost of a tour that is a hamiltonian cycle in G.

What happens upon applying the approximation algorithm A to the
traveling-salesperson problem (G, c)? Because A is guaranteed to

return a tour of cost no more than times the cost of an optimal tour,

if G contains a hamiltonian cycle, then A must return it. If G has no
hamiltonian cycle, then A returns a tour of cost more than |V|.
Therefore, using A solves the hamiltonian-cycle problem in polynomial

time.

The proof of Theorem 35.3 serves as an example of a general
technique to prove that no good approximation algorithm exists for a

particular problem. Given an NP-hard decision problem X, produce in
polynomial time a minimization problem Y such that "yes" instances of
X correspond to instances of Y with value at most k (for some k), but
that "no" instances of X correspond to instances of Y with value
greater than k. This technique shows that, unless P = NP, there is no
polynomial-time -approximation algorithm for problem Y.

Exercises

35.2-1
Let G = (V, E) be a complete undirected graph containing at least 3
vertices, and let c be a cost function that satisfies the triangle inequality.
Prove that c(u, v) 0 for all u, v V.

35.2-2

Show how in polynomial time to transform one instance of the
traveling-salesperson problem into another instance whose cost
function satisfies the triangle inequality. The two instances must have
the same set of optimal tours. Explain why such a polynomial-time
transformation does not contradict Theorem 35.3, assuming that P
NP.

35.2-3
Consider the following closest-point heuristic for building an

approximate traveling-salesperson tour whose cost function satisfies the
triangle inequality. Begin with a trivial cycle consisting of a single

arbitrarily chosen vertex. At each step, identify the vertex u that is not

on the cycle but whose distance to any vertex on the cycle is minimum.

Suppose that the vertex on the cycle that is nearest u is vertex v. Extend
the cycle to include u by inserting u just after v. Repeat until all vertices

are on the cycle. Prove that this heuristic returns a tour whose total cost
is not more than twice the cost of an optimal tour.

35.2-4
A solution to the bottleneck traveling-salesperson problem is the

hamiltonian cycle that minimizes the cost of the most costly edge in the
cycle. Assuming that the cost function satisfies the triangle inequality,
show that there exists a polynomial-time approximation algorithm with

approximation ratio 3 for this problem. (Hint: Show recursively how to

visit all the nodes in a bottleneck spanning tree, as discussed in Problem
21-4 on page 601, exactly once by taking a full walk of the tree and
skipping nodes, but without skipping more than two consecutive
intermediate nodes. Show that the costliest edge in a bottleneck
spanning tree has a cost bounded from above by the cost of the
costliest edge in a bottleneck hamiltonian cycle.)

35.2-5

Suppose that the vertices for an instance of the traveling-salesperson

problem are points in the plane and that the cost c(u, v) is the euclidean
distance between points u and v. Show that an optimal tour never

crosses itself.

35.2-6
Adapt the proof of Theorem 35.3 to show that for any constant c 0,

there is no polynomial-time approximation algorithm with

approximation ratio |V|c for the general traveling-salesperson problem.