35.4 Randomization and linear programming

This section studies two useful techniques for designing approximation
algorithms: randomization and linear programming. It starts with a
simple randomized algorithm for an optimization version of 3-CNF
satisfiability, and then it shows how to design an approximation
algorithm for a weighted version of the vertex-cover problem based on
linear programming. This section only scratches the surface of these
two powerful techniques. The chapter notes give references for further
study of these areas.

A randomized approximation algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability

Just as some randomized algorithms compute exact solutions, some
randomized algorithms compute approximate solutions. We say that a

randomized algorithm for a problem has an approximation ratio of (n)
if, for any input of size n, the expected cost C of the solution produced
by the randomized algorithm is within a factor of (n) of the cost C* of

an optimal solution:

We call a randomized algorithm that achieves an approximation ratio of

(n) a randomized (n)-approximation algorithm. In other words, a

randomized approximation algorithm is like a deterministic
approximation algorithm, except that the approximation ratio is for an
expected cost.

A particular instance of 3-CNF satisfiability, as defined in Section
34.4, may or may not be satisfiable. In order to be satisfiable, there must
exist an assignment of the variables so that every clause evaluates to 1.
If an instance is not satisfiable, you might instead want to know how
"close" to satisfiable it is, that is, find an assignment of the variables that
satisfies as many clauses as possible. We call the resulting maximization

problem MAX-3-CNF satisfiability. The input to MAX-3-CNF

satisfiability is the same as for 3-CNF satisfiability, and the goal is to
return an assignment of the variables that maximizes the number of

clauses evaluating to 1. You might be surprised that randomly setting
each variable to 1 with probability 1/2 and to 0 with probability 1/2
yields a randomized 8/7-approximation algorithm, but we're about to
see why. Recall that the definition of 3-CNF satisfiability from Section
34.4 requires each clause to consist of exactly three distinct literals. We
now further assume that no clause contains both a variable and its
negation. Exercise 35.4-1 asks you to remove this last assumption.

Theorem 35.5
Given an instance of MAX-3-CNF satisfiability with n variables x1, x2,
... , xn and m clauses, the randomized algorithm that independently sets

each variable to 1 with probability 1/2 and to 0 with probability 1/2 is a
randomized 8/7-approximation algorithm.

Proof Suppose that each variable is independently set to 1 with
probability 1/2 and to 0 with probability 1/2. Define, for i = 1, 2, ... , m,

the indicator random variable

Yi = I {clause i is satisfied},

so that Yi = 1 as long as at least one of the literals in the ith clause is set

to 1. Since no literal appears more than once in the same clause, and
since we assume that no variable and its negation appear in the same
clause, the settings of the three literals in each clause are independent.
A clause is not satisfied only if all three of its literals are set to 0, and so

Pr {clause i is not satisfied} = (1/2)3 = 1/8. Thus, we have Pr {clause i is
satisfied} = 1 - 1/8 = 7/8, and Lemma 5.1 on page 130 gives E [Yi] = 7/8.
Let Y be the number of satisfied clauses overall, so that Y = Y1 + Y2 +
+ Ym. Then, we have

Since m is an upper bound on the number of satisfied clauses, the
approximation ratio is at most m/(7m/8) = 8/7.

Approximating weighted vertex cover using linear programming

The minimum-weight vertex-cover problem takes as input an undirected
graph G = (V, E) in which each vertex v V has an associated positive
weight w(v). The weight w(V) of a vertex cover V V is the sum of the
weights of its vertices: w(V) = vV w(v). The goal is to find a vertex

cover of minimum weight.
The approximation algorithm for unweighted vertex cover from

Section 35.1 won't work here, because the solution it returns could be
far from optimal for the weighted problem. Instead, we'll first compute
a lower bound on the weight of the minimum-weight vertex cover, by
using a linear program. Then we'll "round" this solution and use it to
obtain a vertex cover.

Start by associating a variable x(v) with each vertex v V, and
require that x(v) equals either 0 or 1 for each v V. The vertex cover
includes v if and only if x(v) = 1. Then the constraint that for any edge
(u, v), at least one of u and v must belong to the vertex cover can be
expressed as x(u) + x(v) 1. This view gives rise to the following 0-1
integer program for finding a minimum-weight vertex cover:

subject to

In the special case in which all the weights w(v) equal 1, this

formulation is the optimization version of the NP-hard vertex-cover

problem. Let's remove the constraint that x(v) {0, 1} and replace it by
0 x(v) 1, resulting in the following linear program:

subject to

We refer to this linear program as the linear-programming relaxation.

Any feasible solution to the 0-1 integer program in lines (35.12)(35.14)
is also a feasible solution to its linear-programming relaxation in lines
(35.15)(35.18). Therefore, the value of an optimal solution to the
linear-programming relaxation provides a lower bound on the value of
an optimal solution to the 0-1 integer program, and hence a lower
bound on the optimal weight in the minimum-weight vertex-cover
problem.

The procedure APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC on the facing page
starts with a solution to the linear-programming relaxation and uses it
to construct an approximate solution to the minimum-weight vertexcover problem. The procedure works as follows. Line 1 initializes the
vertex cover to be empty. Line 2 formulates the linear-programming
relaxation in lines (35.15)(35.18) and then solves this linear program.

An optimal solution gives each vertex v an associated value x(v), where
0 x(v) 1. The procedure uses this value to guide the choice of which
vertices to add to the vertex cover C in lines 35: the vertex cover C
includes vertex v if and only if x(v) 1/2. In effect, the procedure

"rounds" each fractional variable in the solution to the linearprogramming relaxation to either 0 or 1 in order to obtain a solution to

the 0-1 integer program in lines (35.12)(35.14). Finally, line 6 returns

the vertex cover C.

Theorem 35.6

Algorithm APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a polynomial-time2approximation algorithm for the minimum-weight vertex-cover
problem.

APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC (G, w)

1 C=Ø

2 compute x, an optimal solution to the linear-programming

relaxation in lines (35.15)(35.18)

3 for each vertex v V

4 if x(v) 1/2

5 C = C {v}

6 return C

Proof Because there is a polynomial-time algorithm to solve the linear

program in line 2, and because the for loop of lines 35 runs in

polynomial time, APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a polynomial-time

algorithm.

It remains to show that APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a 2-

approximation algorithm. Let C* be an optimal solution to the
minimum-weight vertex-cover problem, and let z* be the value of an

optimal solution to the linear-programming relaxation in lines (35.15)

(35.18). Since an optimal vertex cover is a feasible solution to the linear-

programming relaxation, z* must be a lower bound on w(C*), that is,

Next, we claim that rounding the fractional values of the variables x(v)
in lines 35 produces a set C that is a vertex cover and satisfies w(C)
2z*. To see that C is a vertex cover, consider any edge (u, v) E. By
constraint (35.16), we know that x(u) + x(v) 1, which implies that at

least one of x(u) and x(v) is at least 1/2. Therefore, at least one of u and
v is included in the vertex cover, and so every edge is covered.

Now we consider the weight of the cover. We have

Combining inequalities (35.19) and (35.20) gives

w(C) 2z* 2w(C*),

and hence APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a 2-approximation
algorithm.

Exercises

35.4-1

Show that even if a clause is allowed to contain both a variable and its
negation, randomly setting each variable to 1 with probability 1/2 and
to 0 with probability 1/2 still yields a randomized 8/7-approximation
algorithm.

35.4-2
The MAX-CNF satisfiability problem is like the MAX-3-CNF

satisfiability problem, except that it does not restrict each clause to have

exactly three literals. Give a randomized 2-approximation algorithm for
the MAX-CNF satisfiability problem.

35.4-3

In the MAX-CUT problem, the input is an unweighted undirected

graph G = (V, E). We define a cut (S, V - S) as in Chapter 21 and the
weight of a cut as the number of edges crossing the cut. The goal is to
find a cut of maximum weight. Suppose that each vertex v is randomly
and independently placed into S with probability 1/2 and into V -S with

probability 1/2. Show that this algorithm is a randomized 2approximation algorithm.

35.4-4

Show that the constraints in line (35.17) are redundant in the sense that
removing them from the linear-programming relaxation in lines (35.15)

(35.18) yields a linear program for which any optimal solution x must
satisfy x(v) 1 for each v V.