3.3 Standard notations and common functions

This section reviews some standard mathematical functions and
notations and explores the relationships among them. It also illustrates
the use of the asymptotic notations.

Monotonicity

A function f (n) is monotonically increasing if m n implies f (m) f (n).
Similarly, it is monotonically decreasing if m n implies f (m) f (n). A
function f (n) is strictly increasing if m < n implies f (m) < f (n) and
strictly decreasing if m < n implies f (m) > f (n).

Floors and ceilings

For any real number x, we denote the greatest integer less than or equal
to x by x (read "the floor of x") and the least integer greater than or
equal to x by x (read "the ceiling of x"). The floor function is

monotonically increasing, as is the ceiling function.

Floors and ceilings obey the following properties. For any integer n,

we have

For all real x, we have

We also have

or equivalently,

For any real number x 0 and integers a, b > 0, we have

For any integer n and real number x, we have

Modular arithmetic

For any integer a and any positive integer n, the value a mod n is the
remainder (or residue) of the quotient a/n:

It follows that

even when a is negative.

Given a well-defined notion of the remainder of one integer when
divided by another, it is convenient to provide special notation to

indicate equality of remainders. If (a mod n) = (b mod n), we write a = b
(mod n) and say that a is equivalent to b, modulo n. In other words, a =
b (mod n) if a and b have the same remainder when divided by n.
Equivalently, a = b (mod n) if and only if n is a divisor of b a. We write
a b (mod n) if a is not equivalent to b, modulo n.

Polynomials

Given a nonnegative integer d, a polynomial in n of degree d is a function
p(n) of the form

where the constants a0, a1, ... , ad are the coefficients of the polynomial
and ad 0. A polynomial is asymptotically positive if and only if ad > 0.
For an asymptotically positive polynomial p(n) of degree d, we have p(n)
= (nd). For any real constant a 0, the function na is monotonically
increasing, and for any real constant a 0, the function na is
monotonically decreasing. We say that a function f (n) is polynomially
bounded if f (n) = O(nk) for some constant k.

Exponentials

For all real a > 0, m, and n, we have the following identities:
a0 = 1,
a1 = a,
a1 = 1/a,

(am)n = amn,
(am)n = (an)m,
aman = am+n.
For all n and a 1, the function an is monotonically increasing in n.

When convenient, we assume that 00 = 1.
We can relate the rates of growth of polynomials and exponentials

by the following fact. For all real constants a > 1 and b, we have

from which we can conclude that

Thus, any exponential function with a base strictly greater than 1 grows
faster than any polynomial function.

Using e to denote 2.71828 ..., the base of the natural-logarithm
function, we have for all real x,

where "!" denotes the factorial function defined later in this section. For

all real x, we have the inequality

where equality holds only when x = 0. When |x| 1, we have the

approximation

When x 0, the approximation of ex by 1 + x is quite good:
ex = 1 + x + (x2).

(In this equation, the asymptotic notation is used to describe the

limiting behavior as x 0 rather than as x .) We have for all x,

Logarithms
We use the following notations:

lg n = log2 n (binary logarithm),
ln n = loge n (natural logarithm),
lgk n = (lg n)k (exponentiation),
lg lg n = lg(lg n) (composition).

We adopt the following notational convention: in the absence of

parentheses, a logarithm function applies only to the next term in the
formula, so that lg n + 1 means (lg n) + 1 and not lg(n + 1).

For any constant b > 1, the function logb n is undefined if n 0,
strictly increasing if n > 0, negative if 0 < n < 1, positive if n > 1, and 0 if
n = 1. For all real a > 0, b > 0, c > 0, and n, we have

where, in each equation above, logarithm bases are not 1.
By equation (3.19), changing the base of a logarithm from one

constant to another changes the value of the logarithm by only a

constant factor. Consequently, we often use the notation "lg n" when
we don't care about constant factors, such as in O-notation. Computer

scientists find 2 to be the most natural base for logarithms because so
many algorithms and data structures involve splitting a problem into
two parts.

There is a simple series expansion for ln(1 + x) when |x| < 1:

We also have the following inequalities for x > 1:

where equality holds only for x = 0.
We say that a function f (n) is polylogarithmically bounded if f (n) =

O(lgk n) for some constant k. We can relate the growth of polynomials
and polylogarithms by substituting lg n for n and 2a for a in equation
(3.13). For all real constants a > 0 and b, we have

Thus, any positive polynomial function grows faster than any
polylogarithmic function.

Factorials

The notation n! (read "n factorial") is defined for integers n 0 as

Thus, n! = 1 · 2 · 3 n.
A weak upper bound on the factorial function is n! nn, since each

of the n terms in the factorial product is at most n. Stirling's

approximation,

where e is the base of the natural logarithm, gives us a tighter upper

bound, and a lower bound as well. Exercise 3.3-4 asks you to prove the
three facts

where Stirling's approximation is helpful in proving equation (3.28). The

following equation also holds for all n 1:

where

Functional iteration

We use the notation f(i) (n) to denote the function f (n) iteratively
applied i times to an initial value of n. Formally, let f (n) be a function
over the reals. For nonnegative integers i, we recursively define

For example, if f (n) = 2n, then f(i) (n) = 2in.

The iterated logarithm function

We use the notation lg*n (read "log star of n") to denote the iterated
logarithm, defined as follows. Let lg(i) n be as defined above, with f (n) =
lg n. Because the logarithm of a nonpositive number is undefined, lg(i)

n is defined only if lg(i1) n > 0. Be sure to distinguish lg(i) n (the
logarithm function applied i times in succession, starting with argument
n) from lgi n (the logarithm of n raised to the ith power). Then we define

the iterated logarithm function as

lg*n = min {i 0 : lg(i) n 1}.
The iterated logarithm is a very slowly growing function:

lg* 2 = 1,
lg* 4 = 2,
lg* 16 = 3,
lg* 65536 = 4,
lg* (265536) = 5.

Since the number of atoms in the observable universe is estimated to be
about 1080, which is much less than 265536 = 1065536/lg 10 1019,728,

we rarely encounter an input size n for which lg* n > 5.

Fibonacci numbers

We define the Fibonacci numbers Fi, for i 0, as follows:

Thus, after the first two, each Fibonacci number is the sum of the two
previous ones, yielding the sequence
0, 1, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 21, 34, 55, ....

Fibonacci numbers are related to the golden ratio and its conjugate ,

which are the two roots of the equation

x2 = x + 1.

As Exercise 3.3-7 asks you to prove, the golden ratio is given by

and its conjugate, by

Specifically, we have

which can be proved by induction (Exercise 3.3-8). Since , we have

which implies that

which is to say that the ith Fibonacci number Fi is equal to

rounded to the nearest integer. Thus, Fibonacci numbers grow
exponentially.

Exercises

3.3-1
Show that if f (n) and g(n) are monotonically increasing functions, then
so are the functions f (n) + g(n) and f (g(n)), and if f (n) and g(n) are in
addition nonnegative, then f (n) · g(n) is monotonically increasing.
3.3-2

Prove that n + (1 )n = n for any integer n and real number in

the range 0 1.

3.3-3
Use equation (3.14) or other means to show that (n + o(n))k = (nk) for
any real constant k. Conclude that nk = (nk) and nk = (nk).

3.3-4

Prove the following:

a. Equation (3.21).
b. Equations (3.26)(3.28).
c. lg((n)) = (lg n).

3.3-5
Is the function lg n! polynomially bounded? Is the function lg lg n!

polynomially bounded?

3.3-6
Which is asymptotically larger: lg(lg* n) or lg*(lg n)?

3.3-7 both satisfy the

Show that the golden ratio and its conjugate

equation x2 = x + 1.

3.3-8
Prove by induction that the ith Fibonacci number satisfies the equation

where is the golden ratio and is its conjugate.

3.3-9
Show that k lg k = (n) implies k = (n/lg n).

Problems

3-1 Asymptotic behavior of polynomials

Let

where ad > 0, be a degree-d polynomial in n, and let k be a constant.

Use the definitions of the asymptotic notations to prove the following
properties.

a. If k d, then p(n) = O(nk).
b. If k d, then p(n) = (nk).
c. If k = d, then p(n) = (nk).
d. If k > d, then p(n) = o(nk).
e. If k < d, then p(n) = (nk).
3-2 Relative asymptotic growths
Indicate, for each pair of expressions (A, B) in the table below whether
A is O, o, , , or of B. Assume that k 1, > 0, and c > 1 are

constants. Write your answer in the form of the table with "yes" or
"no" written in each box.

3-3 Ordering by asymptotic growth rates

a. Rank the following functions by order of growth. That is, find an
arrangement g1, g2, ... , g30 of the functions satisfying g1 = (g2), g2

= (g3), ... , g29 = (g30). Partition your list into equivalence classes

such that functions f (n) and g(n) belong to the same class if and only
if f (n) = (g(n)).

lg(lg* n) 2lg* n n2 n! (lg
n)!

(3/2)n n3 lg2 n lg(n!) n1/lg

n

ln ln n lg* n n · 2n nlg lg ln n 1
n

2lg n (lg n)lg en 4lg n (n +
1)!
n

lg*(lg n) n 2n n lg n

b. Give an example of a single nonnegative function f (n) such that for
all functions gi(n) in part (a), f (n) is neither O(gi(n)) nor (gi(n)).

3-4 Asymptotic notation properties
Let f (n) and g(n) be asymptotically positive functions. Prove or

disprove each of the following conjectures.

a. f (n) = O(g(n)) implies g(n) = O(f (n)).
b. f (n) + g(n) = (min {f (n), g(n)}).
c. f (n) = O(g(n)) implies lg f (n) = O(lg g(n)), where lg g(n) 1 and f (n)

1 for all sufficiently large n.
d. f (n) = O(g(n)) implies 2f(n) = O (2g(n)).

e. f (n) = O ((f (n))2).
f. f (n) = O(g(n)) implies g(n) = (f (n)).

g. f (n) = (f (n/2)).
h. f (n) + o(f (n)) = (f (n)).
3-5 Manipulating asymptotic notation
Let f (n) and g(n) be asymptotically positive functions. Prove the

following identities:

a. ((f (n))) = (f (n)).
b. (f (n)) + O(f (n)) = (f (n)).
c. (f (n)) + (g(n)) = (f (n) + g(n)).
d. (f (n)) · (g(n)) = (f (n) · g(n)).
e. Argue that for any real constants a1, b1 > 0 and integer constants k1,

k2, the following asymptotic bound holds:

f. Prove that for S Z, we have

assuming that both sums converge.

g. Show that for S Z, the following asymptotic bound does not

necessarily hold, even assuming that both products converge, by
giving a counterexample:

3-6 Variations on O and

Some authors define -notation in a slightly different way than this
textbook does. We'll use the nomenclature (read "omega infinity") for

this alternative definition. We say that if there exists a

positive constant c such that f (n) cg(n) 0 for infinitely many integers
n.

a. Show that for any two asymptotically nonnegative functions f (n) and

g(n), we have f (n) = O(g(n)) or (or both).

b. Show that there exist two asymptotically nonnegative functions f (n)
and g(n) for which neither f (n) = O(g(n)) nor f (n) = (g(n)) holds.

c. Describe the potential advantages and disadvantages of using -

notation instead of -notation to characterize the running times of
programs.

Some authors also define O in a slightly different manner. We'll use O
for the alternative definition: f (n) = O(g(n)) if and only if |f (n)| =
O(g(n)).

d. What happens to each direction of the "if and only if " in Theorem
3.1 on page 56 if we substitute O for O but still use ?

Some authors define (read "soft-oh") to mean O with logarithmic

factors ignored:

: there exist positive constants c, k, and n0

such that 0 f (n) cg(n) lgk(n) for all n
n0}.

e. Define and in a similar manner. Prove the corresponding analog

to Theorem 3.1.

3-7 Iterated functions

We can apply the iteration operator * used in the lg* function to any

monotonically increasing function f (n) over the reals. For a given
constant c R, we define the iterated function by

which need not be well defined in all cases. In other words, the quantity

is the minimum number of iterated applications of the function f

required to reduce its argument down to c or less.

For each of the functions f (n) and constants c in the table below,

give as tight a bound as possible on . If there is no i such that f(i)

(n) c, write "undefined" as your answer.

f (n) c

a. n 1 0

b. lg n 1

c. n/2 1

d. n/2 2

e. 2

f. 1

g. n1/3 2

Chapter notes

Knuth [259] traces the origin of the O-notation to a number-theory text
by P. Bachmann in 1892. The o-notation was invented by E. Landau in

1909 for his discussion of the distribution of prime numbers. The and

notations were advocated by Knuth [265] to correct the popular, but

technically sloppy, practice in the literature of using O-notation for

both upper and lower bounds. As noted earlier in this chapter, many

people continue to use the O-notation where the -notation is more

technically precise. The soft-oh notation in Problem 3-6 was

introduced by Babai, Luks, and Seress [31], although it was originally

written as O~. Some authors now define as ignoring factors that

are logarithmic in g(n), rather than in n. With this definition, we can say

that , but with the definition in Problem 3-6, this statement

is not true. Further discussion of the history and development of

asymptotic notations appears in works by Knuth [259, 265] and

Brassard and Bratley [70].

Not all authors define the asymptotic notations in the same way,
although the various definitions agree in most common situations.
Some of the alternative definitions encompass functions that are not
asymptotically nonnegative, as long as their absolute values are
appropriately bounded.

Equation (3.29) is due to Robbins [381]. Other properties of
elementary mathematical functions can be found in any good
mathematical reference, such as Abramowitz and Stegun [1] or
Zwillinger [468], or in a calculus book, such as Apostol [19] or Thomas
et al. [433]. Knuth [259] and Graham, Knuth, and Patashnik [199]
contain a wealth of material on discrete mathematics as used in
computer science.

1 Within set notation, a colon means "such that."

4 Divide-and-Conquer

The divide-and-conquer method is a powerful strategy for designing
asymptotically efficient algorithms. We saw an example of divide-andconquer in Section 2.3.1 when learning about merge sort. In this
chapter, we'll explore applications of the divide-and-conquer method
and acquire valuable mathematical tools that you can use to solve the
recurrences that arise when analyzing divide-and-conquer algorithms.

Recall that for divide-and-conquer, you solve a given problem

(instance) recursively. If the problem is small enough--the base case--
you just solve it directly without recursing. Otherwise--the recursive
case--you perform three characteristic steps:

Divide the problem into one or more subproblems that are smaller
instances of the same problem.

Conquer the subproblems by solving them recursively.
Combine the subproblem solutions to form a solution to the original

problem.

A divide-and-conquer algorithm breaks down a large problem into
smaller subproblems, which themselves may be broken down into even

smaller subproblems, and so forth. The recursion bottoms out when it

reaches a base case and the subproblem is small enough to solve
directly without further recursing.

Recurrences

To analyze recursive divide-and-conquer algorithms, we'll need some

mathematical tools. A recurrence is an equation that describes a

function in terms of its value on other, typically smaller, arguments.
Recurrences go hand in hand with the divide-and-conquer method
because they give us a natural way to characterize the running times of
recursive algorithms mathematically. You saw an example of a
recurrence in Section 2.3.2 when we analyzed the worst-case running
time of merge sort.

For the divide-and-conquer matrix-multiplication algorithms
presented in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we'll derive recurrences that describe
their worst-case running times. To understand why these two divideand-conquer algorithms perform the way they do, you'll need to learn
how to solve the recurrences that describe their running times. Sections
4.34.7 teach several methods for solving recurrences. These sections
also explore the mathematics behind recurrences, which can give you
stronger intuition for designing your own divide-and-conquer
algorithms.

We want to get to the algorithms as soon as possible. So, let's just
cover a few recurrence basics now, and then we'll look more deeply at
recurrences, especially how to solve them, after we see the matrixmultiplication examples.

The general form of a recurrence is an equation or inequality that
describes a function over the integers or reals using the function itself.
It contains two or more cases, depending on the argument. If a case
involves the recursive invocation of the function on different (usually

smaller) inputs, it is a recursive case. If a case does not involve a
recursive invocation, it is a base case. There may be zero, one, or many

functions that satisfy the statement of the recurrence. The recurrence is

well defined if there is at least one function that satisfies it, and ill defined

otherwise.

Algorithmic recurrences

We'll be particularly interested in recurrences that describe the running

times of divide-and-conquer algorithms. A recurrence T (n) is

algorithmic if, for every sufficiently large threshold constant n0 > 0, the

following two properties hold:

1. For all n < n0, we have T (n) = (1).

2. For all n n0, every path of recursion terminates in a defined base

case within a finite number of recursive invocations.

Similar to how we sometimes abuse asymptotic notation (see page 60),
when a function is not defined for all arguments, we understand that

this definition is constrained to values of n for which T (n) is defined.
Why would a recurrence T (n) that represents a (correct) divide-and-

conquer algorithm's worst-case running time satisfy these properties for
all sufficiently large threshold constants? The first property says that

there exist constants c1, c2 such that 0 < c1 T (n) c2 for n < n0. For

every legal input, the algorithm must output the solution to the

problem it's solving in finite time (see Section 1.1). Thus we can let c1 be

the minimum amount of time to call and return from a procedure,
which must be positive, because machine instructions need to be
executed to invoke a procedure. The running time of the algorithm may

not be defined for some values of n if there are no legal inputs of that

size, but it must be defined for at least one, or else the "algorithm"

doesn't solve any problem. Thus we can let c2 be the algorithm's
maximum running time on any input of size n < n0, where n0 is

sufficiently large that the algorithm solves at least one problem of size

less than n0. The maximum is well defined, since there are at most a
finite number of inputs of size less than n0, and there is at least one if n0
is sufficiently large. Consequently, T (n) satisfies the first property. If the
second property fails to hold for T (n), then the algorithm isn't correct,

because it would end up in an infinite recursive loop or otherwise fail to
compute a solution. Thus, it stands to reason that a recurrence for the
worst-case running time of a correct divide-and-conquer algorithm
would be algorithmic.

Conventions for recurrences

We adopt the following convention:

Whenever a recurrence is stated without an explicit base case, we
assume that the recurrence is algorithmic.

That means you're free to pick any sufficiently large threshold constant

n0 for the range of base cases where T (n) = (1). Interestingly, the

asymptotic solutions of most algorithmic recurrences you're likely to
see when analyzing algorithms don't depend on the choice of threshold
constant, as long as it's large enough to make the recurrence well
defined.

Asymptotic solutions of algorithmic divide-and-conquer recurrences
also don't tend to change when we drop any floors or ceilings in a
recurrence defined on the integers to convert it to a recurrence defined
on the reals. Section 4.7 gives a sufficient condition for ignoring floors
and ceilings that applies to most of the divide-and-conquer recurrences
you're likely to see. Consequently, we'll frequently state algorithmic
recurrences without floors and ceilings. Doing so generally simplifies the
statement of the recurrences, as well as any math that we do with them.

You may sometimes see recurrences that are not equations, but

rather inequalities, such as T (n) 2T (n/2) + (n). Because such a
recurrence states only an upper bound on T (n), we express its solution
using O-notation rather than -notation. Similarly, if the inequality is
reversed to T (n) 2T (n/2) + (n), then, because the recurrence gives
only a lower bound on T (n), we use -notation in its solution.

Divide-and-conquer and recurrences

This chapter illustrates the divide-and-conquer method by presenting
and using recurrences to analyze two divide-and-conquer algorithms

for multiplying n × n matrices. Section 4.1 presents a simple divide-andconquer algorithm that solves a matrix-multiplication problem of size n
by breaking it into four subproblems of size n/2, which it then solves

recursively. The running time of the algorithm can be characterized by
the recurrence

T (n) = 8T (n/2) + (1),

which turns out to have the solution T (n) = (n3). Although this

divide-and-conquer algorithm is no faster than the straightforward
method that uses a triply nested loop, it leads to an asymptotically
faster divide-and-conquer algorithm due to V. Strassen, which we'll
explore in Section 4.2. Strassen's remarkable algorithm divides a

problem of size n into seven subproblems of size n/2 which it solves

recursively. The running time of Strassen's algorithm can be described
by the recurrence

T (n) = 7T (n/2) + (n2),

which has the solution T (n) = (nlg 7) = O(n2.81). Strassen's algorithm

beats the straightforward looping method asymptotically.
These two divide-and-conquer algorithms both break a problem of

size n into several subproblems of size n/2. Although it is common when

using divide-and-conquer for all the subproblems to have the same size,
that isn't always the case. Sometimes it's productive to divide a problem

of size n into subproblems of different sizes, and then the recurrence

describing the running time reflects the irregularity. For example,
consider a divide-and-conquer algorithm that divides a problem of size

n into one subproblem of size n/3 and another of size 2n/3, taking (n)

time to divide the problem and combine the solutions to the
subproblems. Then the algorithm's running time can be described by the
recurrence

T (n) = T (n/3) + T (2n/3) + (n),

which turns out to have solution T (n) = (n lg n). We'll even see an
algorithm in Chapter 9 that solves a problem of size n by recursively
solving a subproblem of size n/5 and another of size 7n/10, taking (n)

time for the divide and combine steps. Its performance satisfies the
recurrence

T (n) = T (n/5) + T (7n/10) + (n),

which has solution T (n) = (n).

Although divide-and-conquer algorithms usually create subproblems
with sizes a constant fraction of the original problem size, that's not

always the case. For example, a recursive version of linear search (see
Exercise 2.1-4) creates just one subproblem, with one element less than
the original problem. Each recursive call takes constant time plus the
time to recursively solve a subproblem with one less element, leading to
the recurrence

T (n) = T (n 1) + (1),

which has solution T (n) = (n). Nevertheless, the vast majority of

efficient divide-and-conquer algorithms solve subproblems that are a
constant fraction of the size of the original problem, which is where
we'll focus our efforts.

Solving recurrences

After learning about divide-and-conquer algorithms for matrix
multiplication in Sections 4.1 and 4.2, we'll explore several mathematical

tools for solving recurrences--that is, for obtaining asymptotic -, O-,

or -bounds on their solutions. We want simple-to-use tools that can
handle the most commonly occurring situations. But we also want
general tools that work, perhaps with a little more effort, for less
common cases. This chapter offers four methods for solving
recurrences:

In the substitution method (Section 4.3), you guess the form of a

bound and then use mathematical induction to prove your guess
correct and solve for constants. This method is perhaps the most
robust method for solving recurrences, but it also requires you to
make a good guess and to produce an inductive proof.

The recursion-tree method (Section 4.4) models the recurrence as

a tree whose nodes represent the costs incurred at various levels
of the recursion. To solve the recurrence, you determine the costs
at each level and add them up, perhaps using techniques for
bounding summations from Section A.2. Even if you don't use this
method to formally prove a bound, it can be helpful in guessing
the form of the bound for use in the substitution method.

The master method (Sections 4.5 and 4.6) is the easiest method,

when it applies. It provides bounds for recurrences of the form

T (n) = aT (n/b) + f (n),
where a > 0 and b > 1 are constants and f (n) is a given "driving"

function. This type of recurrence tends to arise more frequently
in the study of algorithms than any other. It characterizes a

divide-and-conquer algorithm that creates a subproblems, each of
which is 1/b times the size of the original problem, using f (n) time

for the divide and combine steps. To apply the master method,
you need to memorize three cases, but once you do, you can easily
determine asymptotic bounds on running times for many divide-
and-conquer algorithms.

The Akra-Bazzi method (Section 4.7) is a general method for

solving divide-and-conquer recurrences. Although it involves
calculus, it can be used to attack more complicated recurrences
than those addressed by the master method.