4.1 Multiplying square matrices

We can use the divide-and-conquer method to multiply square matrices.
If you've seen matrices before, then you probably know how to multiply

them. (Otherwise, you should read Section D.1.) Let A = (aik) and B =
(bjk) be square n × n matrices. The matrix product C = A · B is also an n
× n matrix, where for i, j = 1, 2, ... , n, the (i, j) entry of C is given by

Generally, we'll assume that the matrices are dense, meaning that most
of the n2 entries are not 0, as opposed to sparse, where most of the n2

entries are 0 and the nonzero entries can be stored more compactly

than in an n × n array.

Computing the matrix C requires computing n2 matrix entries, each
of which is the sum of n pairwise products of input elements from A and
B. The MATRIX-MULTIPLY procedure implements this strategy in a

straightforward manner, and it generalizes the problem slightly. It takes

as input three n × n matrices A, B, and C, and it adds the matrix
product A · B to C, storing the result in C. Thus, it computes C = C + A
· B, instead of just C = A · B. If only the product A · B is needed, just

initialize all n2 entries of C to 0 before calling the procedure, which

takes an additional (n2) time. We'll see that the cost of matrix

multiplication asymptotically dominates this initialization cost.

MATRIX-MULTIPLY(A, B, C, n)

1 for i = 1 to n // compute entries in each of n rows

2 for j = 1 to n // compute n entries in row i

3 for k = 1 to n

4 cij = cij + aik · bkj // add in another term of equation

(4.1)

The pseudocode for MATRIX-MULTIPLY works as follows. The

for loop of lines 14 computes the entries of each row i, and within a
given row i, the for loop of lines 24 computes each of the entries cij for
each column j. Each iteration of the for loop of lines 34 adds in one

more term of equation (4.1).

Because each of the triply nested for loops runs for exactly n

iterations, and each execution of line 4 takes constant time, the

MATRIX-MULTIPLY procedure operates in (n3) time. Even if we
add in the (n2) time for initializing C to 0, the running time is still
(n3).

A simple divide-and-conquer algorithm

Let's see how to compute the matrix product A · B using divide-andconquer. For n > 1, the divide step partitions the n × n matrices into

four n/2 × n/2 submatrices. We'll assume that n is an exact power of 2,

so that as the algorithm recurses, we are guaranteed that the submatrix
dimensions are integer. (Exercise 4.1-1 asks you to relax this

assumption.) As with MATRIX-MULTIPLY, we'll actually compute C
= C + A · B. But to simplify the math behind the algorithm, let's assume
that C has been initialized to the zero matrix, so that we are indeed
computing C = A · B.

The divide step views each of the n × n matrices A, B, and C as four
n/2 × n/2 submatrices:

Then we can write the matrix product as

which corresponds to the equations

Equations (4.5)(4.8) involve eight n/2 × n/2 multiplications and four
additions of n/2 × n/2 submatrices.

As we look to transform these equations to an algorithm that can be
described with pseudocode, or even implemented for real, there are two
common approaches for implementing the matrix partitioning.

One strategy is to allocate temporary storage to hold A's four
submatrices A11, A12, A21, and A22 and B's four submatrices B11, B12,
B21, and B22. Then copy each element in A and B to its corresponding

location in the appropriate submatrix. After the recursive conquer step,

copy the elements in each of C's four submatrices C11, C12, C21, and

C22 to their corresponding locations in C. This approach takes (n2)
time, since 3n2 elements are copied.

The second approach uses index calculations and is faster and more
practical. A submatrix can be specified within a matrix by indicating
where within the matrix the submatrix lies without touching any matrix
elements. Partitioning a matrix (or recursively, a submatrix) only
involves arithmetic on this location information, which has constant size
independent of the size of the matrix. Changes to the submatrix
elements update the original matrix, since they occupy the same
storage.

Going forward, we'll assume that index calculations are used and
that partitioning can be performed in (1) time. Exercise 4.1-3 asks you
to show that it makes no difference to the overall asymptotic running
time of matrix multiplication, however, whether the partitioning of
matrices uses the first method of copying or the second method of
index calculation. But for other divide-and-conquer matrix calculations,
such as matrix addition, it can make a difference, as Exercise 4.1-4 asks
you to show.

The procedure MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE uses equations
(4.5)(4.8) to implement a divide-and-conquer strategy for squarematrix multiplication. Like MATRIX-MULTIPLY, the procedure

MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE computes C = C + A · B since, if
necessary, C can be initialized to 0 before the procedure is called in
order to compute only C = A · B.

MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A, B, C, n)

1if n == 1

2// Base case.

3 c11 = c11 + a11 · b11

4 return
5// Divide.

6partition A, B, and C into n/2 × n/2 submatrices
A11, A12, A21, A22; B11, B12, B21, B22;
and C11, C12, C21, C22; respectively

7// Conquer.

8MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A11, B11, C11, n/2)
9MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A11, B12, C12, n/2)
10MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A21, B11, C21, n/2)
11MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A21, B12, C22, n/2)
12MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A12, B21, C11, n/2)
13MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A12, B22, C12, n/2)
14MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A22, B21, C21, n/2)
15MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE(A22, B22, C22, n/2)

As we walk through the pseudocode, we'll derive a recurrence to

characterize its running time. Let T (n) be the worst-case time to
multiply two n × n matrices using this procedure.

In the base case, when n = 1, line 3 performs just the one scalar
multiplication and one addition, which means that T (1) = (1). As is

our convention for constant base cases, we can omit this base case in

the statement of the recurrence.

The recursive case occurs when n > 1. As discussed, we'll use index

calculations to partition the matrices in line 6, taking (1) time. Lines

815 recursively call MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE a total of

eight times. The first four recursive calls compute the first terms of

equations (4.5)(4.8), and the subsequent four recursive calls compute

and add in the second terms. Each recursive call adds the product of a

submatrix of A and a submatrix of B to the appropriate submatrix of C

in place, thanks to index calculations. Because each recursive call

multiplies two n/2 × n/2 matrices, thereby contributing T (n/2) to the
overall running time, the time taken by all eight recursive calls is 8T
(n/2). There is no combine step, because the matrix C is updated in

place. The total time for the recursive case, therefore, is the sum of the

partitioning time and the time for all the recursive calls, or (1) + 8T
(n/2).

Thus, omitting the statement of the base case, our recurrence for the

running time of MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE is

As we'll see from the master method in Section 4.5, recurrence (4.9) has

the solution T (n) = (n3), which means that it has the same asymptotic

running time as the straightforward MATRIX-MULTIPLY procedure.

Why is the (n3) solution to this recurrence so much larger than the
(n lg n) solution to the merge-sort recurrence (2.3) on page 41? After
all, the recurrence for merge sort contains a (n) term, whereas the

recurrence for recursive matrix multiplication contains only a (1)
term.

Let's think about what the recursion tree for recurrence (4.9) would
look like as compared with the recursion tree for merge sort, illustrated
in Figure 2.5 on page 43. The factor of 2 in the merge-sort recurrence
determines how many children each tree node has, which in turn
determines how many terms contribute to the sum at each level of the
tree. In comparison, for the recurrence (4.9) for MATRIXMULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, each internal node in the recursion tree has
eight children, not two, leading to a "bushier" recursion tree with many
more leaves, despite the fact that the internal nodes are each much
smaller. Consequently, the solution to recurrence (4.9) grows much
more quickly than the solution to recurrence (2.3), which is borne out

in the actual solutions: (n3) versus (n lg n).

Exercises

Note: You may wish to read Section 4.5 before attempting some of

these exercises.

4.1-1
Generalize MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE to multiply n × n
matrices for which n is not necessarily an exact power of 2. Give a
recurrence describing its running time. Argue that it runs in (n3) time

in the worst case.

4.1-2

How quickly can you multiply a k n × n matrix (k n rows and n columns)
by an n × k n matrix, where k 1, using MATRIX-MULTIPLY-

RECURSIVE as a subroutine? Answer the same question for

multiplying an n × k n matrix by a k n × n matrix. Which is

asymptotically faster, and by how much?

4.1-3

Suppose that instead of partitioning matrices by index calculation in
MATRIX-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, you copy the appropriate

elements of A, B, and C into separate n/2 × n/2 submatrices A11, A12,
A21, A22; B11, B12, B21, B22; and C11, C12, C21, C22, respectively.
After the recursive calls, you copy the results from C11, C12, C21, and
C22 back into the appropriate places in C. How does recurrence (4.9)

change, and what is its solution?

4.1-4

Write pseudocode for a divide-and-conquer algorithm MATRIX-ADD-

RECURSIVE that sums two n × n matrices A and B by partitioning
each of them into four n/2 × n/2 submatrices and then recursively

summing corresponding pairs of submatrices. Assume that matrix
partitioning uses (1)-time index calculations. Write a recurrence for
the worst-case running time of MATRIX-ADD-RECURSIVE, and

solve your recurrence. What happens if you use (n2)-time copying to

implement the partitioning instead of index calculations?