4.6 Proof of the continuous master theorem

Proving the master theorem (Theorem 4.1) in its full generality,
especially dealing with the knotty technical issue of floors and ceilings,
is beyond the scope of this book. This section, however, states and

proves a variant of the master theorem, called the continuous master
theorem1 in which the master recurrence (4.17) is defined over

sufficiently large positive real numbers. The proof of this version,
uncomplicated by floors and ceilings, contains the main ideas needed to
understand how master recurrences behave. Section 4.7 discusses floors
and ceilings in divide-and-conquer recurrences at greater length,
presenting sufficient conditions for them not to affect the asymptotic
solutions.

Of course, since you need not understand the proof of the master
theorem in order to apply the master method, you may choose to skip
this section. But if you wish to study more-advanced algorithms beyond
the scope of this textbook, you may appreciate a better understanding
of the underlying mathematics, which the proof of the continuous
master theorem provides.

Although we usually assume that recurrences are algorithmic and
don't require an explicit statement of a base case, we must be much
more careful for proofs that justify the practice. The lemmas and
theorem in this section explicitly state the base cases, because the
inductive proofs require mathematical grounding. It is common in the

world of mathematics to be extraordinarily careful proving theorems
that justify acting more casually in practice.

The proof of the continuous master theorem involves two lemmas.
Lemma 4.2 uses a slightly simplified master recurrence with a threshold

constant of n0 = 1, rather than the more general n0 > 0 threshold

constant implied by the unstated base case. The lemma employs a
recursion tree to reduce the solution of the simplified master recurrence
to that of evaluating a summation. Lemma 4.3 then provides asymptotic
bounds for the summation, mirroring the three cases of the master
theorem. Finally, the continuous master theorem itself (Theorem 4.4)
gives asymptotic bounds for master recurrences, while generalizing to

an arbitrary threshold constant n0 > 0 as implied by the unstated base

case.
Some of the proofs use the properties described in Problem 3-5 on

pages 7273 to combine and simplify complicated asymptotic
expressions. Although Problem 3-5 addresses only -notation, the

properties enumerated there can be extended to O-notation and -

notation as well.
Here's the first lemma.

Lemma 4.2
Let a > 0 and b > 1 be constants, and let f (n) be a function defined over
real numbers n 1. Then the recurrence

has solution

Proof Consider the recursion tree in Figure 4.3. Let's look first at its
internal nodes. The root of the tree has cost f (n), and it has a children,
each with cost f (n/b). (It is convenient to think of a as being an integer,

especially when visualizing the recursion tree, but the mathematics does

not require it.) Each of these children has a children, making a2 nodes

at depth 2, and each of the a children has cost f (n/b2). In general, there

are aj nodes at depth j, and each node has cost f (n/bj).

Now, let's move on to understanding the leaves. The tree grows

downward until n/bj becomes less than 1. Thus, the tree has height logb

n + 1, because and .

Since, as we have observed, the number of nodes at depth j is aj and all

the leaves are at depth logb n + 1, the tree contains leaves.

Using the identity (3.21) on page 66, we have

, since a is constant, and

. Consequently, the total number of

leaves is --asymptotically, the watershed function.

We are now in a position to derive equation (4.18) by summing the

costs of the nodes at each depth in the tree, as shown in the figure. The

first term in the equation is the total costs of the leaves. Since each leaf

is at depth logbn + 1 and , the base case of the

recurrence gives the cost of a leaf: . Hence the cost of all

leaves is by Problem 3-5(d). The

second term in equation (4.18) is the cost of the internal nodes, which,

in the underlying divide-and-conquer algorithm, represents the costs of

dividing problems into subproblems and then recombining the

subproblems. Since the cost for all the internal nodes at depth j is aj f

(n/bj), the total cost of all internal nodes is

Figure 4.3 The recursion tree generated by T (n) = aT (n/b) + f (n). The tree is a complete a-

ary tree with leaves and height logb n + 1. The cost of the nodes at each depth is

shown at the right, and their sum is given in equation (4.18).

As we'll see, the three cases of the master theorem depend on the
distribution of the total cost across levels of the recursion tree:

Case 1: The costs increase geometrically from the root to the leaves,
growing by a constant factor with each level.

Case 2: The costs depend on the value of k in the theorem. With k = 0,
the costs are equal for each level; with k = 1, the costs grow linearly
from the root to the leaves; with k = 2, the growth is quadratic; and in
general, the costs grow polynomially in k.

Case 3: The costs decrease geometrically from the root to the leaves,
shrinking by a constant factor with each level.

The summation in equation (4.18) describes the cost of the dividing
and combining steps in the underlying divide-and-conquer algorithm.
The next lemma provides asymptotic bounds on the summation's
growth.

Lemma 4.3
Let a > 0 and b > 1 be constants, and let f (n) be a function defined over
real numbers n 1. Then the asymptotic behavior of the function

defined for n 1, can be characterized as follows:

1. If there exists a constant > 0 such that , then
.

2. If there exists a constant k 0 such that ,

then .

3. If there exists a constant c in the range 0 < c < 1 such that 0 < af
(n/b) cf (n) for all n 1, then g(n) = (f (n)).

Proof For case 1, we have , which implies that

. Substituting into equation (4.19) yields

the last series being geometric. Since b and are constants, the b 1
denominator doesn't affect the asymptotic growth of g(n), and neither

does the 1 in the numerator. Since

, we obtain

, thereby proving case 1.

Case 2 assumes that , from which we can

conclude that . Substituting into

equation (4.19) and repeatedly applying Problem 3-5(c) yields

The summation within the -notation can be bounded from above as
follows:

Exercise 4.6-1 asks you to show that the summation can similarly be

bounded from below by . Since we have tight upper and lower

bounds, the summation is , from which we can conclude that

, thereby completing the proof of case 2.

For case 3, observe that f (n) appears in the definition (4.19) of g(n)
(when j = 0) and that all terms of g(n) are positive. Therefore, we must
have g(n) = (f (n)), and it only remains to prove that g(n) = O(f (n)).
Performing j iterations of the inequality af (n/b) cf (n) yields aj f (n/bj)
cj f (n). Substituting into equation (4.19), we obtain

Thus, we can conclude that g(n) = (f (n)). With case 3 proved, the

entire proof of the lemma is complete.

We can now state and prove the continuous master theorem.

Theorem 4.4 (Continuous master theorem)
Let a > 0 and b > 1 be constants, and let f (n) be a driving function that

is defined and nonnegative on all sufficiently large reals. Define the

algorithmic recurrence T (n) on the positive real numbers by

T (n) = aT (n/b) + f (n).

Then the asymptotic behavior of T (n) can be characterized as follows:

1. If there exists a constant > 0 such that , then
.

2. If there exists a constant k 0 such that , then

.

3. If there exists a constant > 0 such that , and if

f (n) additionally satisfies the regularity condition af (n/b) cf

(n) for some constant c < 1 and all sufficiently large n, then T (n)

= (f (n)).

Proof The idea is to bound the summation (4.18) from Lemma 4.2 by

applying Lemma 4.3. But we must account for Lemma 4.2 using a base

case for 0 < n < 1, whereas this theorem uses an implicit base case for 0
< n < n0, where n0 > 0 is an arbitrary threshold constant. Since the
recurrence is algorithmic, we can assume that f (n) is defined for n n0.

For n > 0, let us define two auxiliary functions T(n) = T (n0 n) and f
(n) = f (n0 n). We have

We have obtained a recurrence for T (n) that satisfies the conditions of

Lemma 4.2, and by that lemma, the solution is

To solve T (n), we first need to bound f (n). Let's examine the

individual cases in the theorem.

The condition for case 1 is for some constant > 0.

We have

since a, b, n0, and are all constant. The function f (n) satisfies the

conditions of case 1 of Lemma 4.3, and the summation in equation

(4.18) of Lemma 4.2 evaluates to . Because a, b and n0 are all

constants, we have

thereby completing case 1 of the theorem. for some constant k
The condition for case 2 is

0. We have

Similar to the proof of case 1, the function f(n) satisfies the conditions

of case 2 of Lemma 4.3. The summation in equation (4.18) of Lemma

4.2 is therefore , which implies that

which proves case 2 of the theorem.

Finally, the condition for case 3 is for some

constant > 0 and f (n) additionally satisfies the regularity condition af

(n/b) cf (n) for all n n0 and some constants c < 1 and n0 > 1. The

first part of case 3 is like case 1:

Using the definition of f (n) and the fact that n0 n n0 for all n 1, we
have for n 1 that

af (n/b) = af (n0 n/b)
cf (n0 n)
= cf (n).

Thus f (n) satisfies the requirements for case 3 of Lemma 4.3, and the
summation in equation (4.18) of Lemma 4.2 evaluates to (f (n)),

yielding

T (n) = T (n/n0)

=

= (f (n/n0))
= (f (n)),

which completes the proof of case 3 of the theorem and thus the whole
theorem.

Exercises

4.6-1

Show that .

4.6-2

Show that case 3 of the master theorem is overstated (which is also why

case 3 of Lemma 4.3 does not require that in the

sense that the regularity condition af (n/b) cf (n) for some constant c

< 1 implies that there exists a constant > 0 such that .

4.6-3

For , prove that the summation in equation (4.19)

has solution . Conclude that a master recurrence T

(n) using f (n) as its driving function has solution .