5.1 The hiring problem

Suppose that you need to hire a new office assistant. Your previous
attempts at hiring have been unsuccessful, and you decide to use an
employment agency. The employment agency sends you one candidate
each day. You interview that person and then decide either to hire that
person or not. You must pay the employment agency a small fee to
interview an applicant. To actually hire an applicant is more costly,
however, since you must fire your current office assistant and also pay a
substantial hiring fee to the employment agency. You are committed to
having, at all times, the best possible person for the job. Therefore, you
decide that, after interviewing each applicant, if that applicant is better
qualified than the current office assistant, you will fire the current office
assistant and hire the new applicant. You are willing to pay the resulting
price of this strategy, but you wish to estimate what that price will be.

The procedure HIRE-ASSISTANT on the facing page expresses this
strategy for hiring in pseudocode. The candidates for the office assistant

job are numbered 1 through n and interviewed in that order. The
procedure assumes that after interviewing candidate i, you can
determine whether candidate i is the best candidate you have seen so

far. It starts by creating a dummy candidate, numbered 0, who is less
qualified than each of the other candidates.

The cost model for this problem differs from the model described in
Chapter 2. We focus not on the running time of HIRE-ASSISTANT,
but instead on the fees paid for interviewing and hiring. On the surface,
analyzing the cost of this algorithm may seem very different from
analyzing the running time of, say, merge sort. The analytical techniques
used, however, are identical whether we are analyzing cost or running
time. In either case, we are counting the number of times certain basic
operations are executed.

HIRE-ASSISTANT(n)

1 best = 0 // candidate 0 is a least-qualified dummy candidate

2 for i = 1 to n

3 interview candidate i

4 if candidate i is better than candidate best

5 best = i

6 hire candidate i

Interviewing has a low cost, say ci, whereas hiring is expensive,
costing ch. Letting m be the number of people hired, the total cost
associated with this algorithm is O(cin + chm). No matter how many
people you hire, you always interview n candidates and thus always
incur the cost cin associated with interviewing. We therefore
concentrate on analyzing chm, the hiring cost. This quantity depends on

the order in which you interview candidates.

This scenario serves as a model for a common computational

paradigm. Algorithms often need to find the maximum or minimum

value in a sequence by examining each element of the sequence and

maintaining a current "winner." The hiring problem models how often a

procedure updates its notion of which element is currently winning.

Worst-case analysis

In the worst case, you actually hire every candidate that you interview.
This situation occurs if the candidates come in strictly increasing order

of quality, in which case you hire n times, for a total hiring cost of
O(chn).

Of course, the candidates do not always come in increasing order of
quality. In fact, you have no idea about the order in which they arrive,
nor do you have any control over this order. Therefore, it is natural to
ask what we expect to happen in a typical or average case.

Probabilistic analysis

Probabilistic analysis is the use of probability in the analysis of

problems. Most commonly, we use probabilistic analysis to analyze the
running time of an algorithm. Sometimes we use it to analyze other
quantities, such as the hiring cost in procedure HIRE-ASSISTANT. In
order to perform a probabilistic analysis, we must use knowledge of, or
make assumptions about, the distribution of the inputs. Then we
analyze our algorithm, computing an average-case running time, where
we take the average, or expected value, over the distribution of the
possible inputs. When reporting such a running time, we refer to it as

the average-case running time.

You must be careful in deciding on the distribution of inputs. For
some problems, you may reasonably assume something about the set of
all possible inputs, and then you can use probabilistic analysis as a
technique for designing an efficient algorithm and as a means for
gaining insight into a problem. For other problems, you cannot
characterize a reasonable input distribution, and in these cases you
cannot use probabilistic analysis.

For the hiring problem, we can assume that the applicants come in a
random order. What does that mean for this problem? We assume that
you can compare any two candidates and decide which one is better
qualified, which is to say that there is a total order on the candidates.
(See Section B.2 for the definition of a total order.) Thus, you can rank

each candidate with a unique number from 1 through n, using rank(i) to

denote the rank of applicant i, and adopt the convention that a higher

rank corresponds to a better qualified applicant. The ordered list

rank(1), rank(2), ... , rank(n) is a permutation of the list 1, 2, ... , n.

Saying that the applicants come in a random order is equivalent to

saying that this list of ranks is equally likely to be any one of the n!
permutations of the numbers 1 through n. Alternatively, we say that the
ranks form a uniform random permutation, that is, each of the possible n!

permutations appears with equal probability.
Section 5.2 contains a probabilistic analysis of the hiring problem.

Randomized algorithms

In order to use probabilistic analysis, you need to know something
about the distribution of the inputs. In many cases, you know little
about the input distribution. Even if you do know something about the
distribution, you might not be able to model this knowledge
computationally. Yet, probability and randomness often serve as tools
for algorithm design and analysis, by making part of the algorithm
behave randomly.

In the hiring problem, it may seem as if the candidates are being
presented to you in a random order, but you have no way of knowing
whether they really are. Thus, in order to develop a randomized
algorithm for the hiring problem, you need greater control over the
order in which you'll interview the candidates. We will, therefore,
change the model slightly. The employment agency sends you a list of

the n candidates in advance. On each day, you choose, randomly, which

candidate to interview. Although you know nothing about the
candidates (besides their names), we have made a significant change.
Instead of accepting the order given to you by the employment agency
and hoping that it's random, you have instead gained control of the
process and enforced a random order.

More generally, we call an algorithm randomized if its behavior is

determined not only by its input but also by values produced by a

random-number generator. We assume that we have at our disposal a
random-number generator RANDOM. A call to RANDOM(a, b)
returns an integer between a and b, inclusive, with each such integer

being equally likely. For example, RANDOM(0, 1) produces 0 with
probability 1/2, and it produces 1 with probability 1/2. A call to
RANDOM(3, 7) returns any one of 3, 4, 5, 6, or 7, each with probability
1/5. Each integer returned by RANDOM is independent of the integers

returned on previous calls. You may imagine RANDOM as rolling a (b
a + 1)-sided die to obtain its output. (In practice, most programming
environments offer a pseudorandom-number generator: a deterministic

algorithm returning numbers that "look" statistically random.)
When analyzing the running time of a randomized algorithm, we

take the expectation of the running time over the distribution of values
returned by the random number generator. We distinguish these
algorithms from those in which the input is random by referring to the

running time of a randomized algorithm as an expected running time. In

general, we discuss the average-case running time when the probability
distribution is over the inputs to the algorithm, and we discuss the
expected running time when the algorithm itself makes random choices.

Exercises

5.1-1

Show that the assumption that you are always able to determine which
candidate is best, in line 4 of procedure HIRE-ASSISTANT, implies
that you know a total order on the ranks of the candidates.

5.1-2
Describe an implementation of the procedure RANDOM(a, b) that

makes calls only to RANDOM(0, 1). What is the expected running time

of your procedure, as a function of a and b?

5.1-3

You wish to implement a program that outputs 0 with probability 1/2
and 1 with probability 1/2. At your disposal is a procedure BIASEDRANDOM that outputs either 0 or 1, but it outputs 1 with some

probability p and 0 with probability 1 p, where 0 < p < 1. You do not
know what p is. Give an algorithm that uses BIASED-RANDOM as a

subroutine, and returns an unbiased answer, returning 0 with

probability 1/2 and 1 with probability 1/2. What is the expected running

time of your algorithm as a function of p?