5.4 Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator
random variables

This advanced section further illustrates probabilistic analysis by way of

four examples. The first determines the probability that in a room of k

people, two of them share the same birthday. The second example
examines what happens when randomly tossing balls into bins. The
third investigates "streaks" of consecutive heads when flipping coins.
The final example analyzes a variant of the hiring problem in which you
have to make decisions without actually interviewing all the candidates.

5.4.1 The birthday paradox

Our first example is the birthday paradox. How many people must there

be in a room before there is a 50% chance that two of them were born
on the same day of the year? The answer is surprisingly few. The
paradox is that it is in fact far fewer than the number of days in a year,
or even half the number of days in a year, as we shall see.

To answer this question, we index the people in the room with the

integers 1, 2, ... , k, where k is the number of people in the room. We
ignore the issue of leap years and assume that all years have n = 365
days. For i = 1, 2, ... , k, let bi be the day of the year on which person i's
birthday falls, where 1 bi n. We also assume that birthdays are
uniformly distributed across the n days of the year, so that Pr {bi = r} =
1/n for i = 1, 2, ... , k and r = 1, 2, ... , n.

The probability that two given people, say i and j, have matching

birthdays depends on whether the random selection of birthdays is
independent. We assume from now on that birthdays are independent,

so that the probability that i's birthday and j's birthday both fall on day
r is

Thus, the probability that they both fall on the same day is

More intuitively, once bi is chosen, the probability that bj is chosen to
be the same day is 1/n. As long as the birthdays are independent, the
probability that i and j have the same birthday is the same as the

probability that the birthday of one of them falls on a given day.

We can analyze the probability of at least 2 out of k people having

matching birthdays by looking at the complementary event. The
probability that at least two of the birthdays match is 1 minus the

probability that all the birthdays are different. The event Bk that k

people have distinct birthdays is

where Ai is the event that person i's birthday is different from person j's
for all j < i. Since we can write Bk = Ak Bk1, we obtain from

equation (C.18) on page 1189 the recurrence

where we take Pr {B1} = Pr {A1} = 1 as an initial condition. In other
words, the probability that b1, b2, ... , bk are distinct birthdays equals
the probability that b1, b2, ... , bk1 are distinct birthdays multiplied by

the probability that bk bi for i = 1, 2, ... , k 1, given that b1, b2, ... ,
bk1 are distinct.

If b1, b2, ... , bk1 are distinct, the conditional probability that bk
bi for i = 1, 2, ... , k 1 is Pr {Ak | Bk1} = (n k + 1)/n, since out of
the n days, n (k 1) days are not taken. We iteratively apply the

recurrence (5.8) to obtain

Inequality (3.14) on page 66, 1 + x ex, gives us

when k(k 1)/2n ln(1/2). The probability that all k birthdays are

distinct is at most 1/2 when k(k 1) 2n ln 2 or, solving the quadratic

equation, when . For n = 365, we must have k

23. Thus, if at least 23 people are in a room, the probability is at least

1/2 that at least two people have the same birthday. Since a year on

Mars is 669 Martian days long, it takes 31 Martians to get the same

effect.

An analysis using indicator random variables

Indicator random variables afford a simpler but approximate analysis of

the birthday paradox. For each pair (i, j) of the k people in the room,

define the indicator random variable Xij, for 1 i < j k, by

By equation (5.7), the probability that two people have matching

birthdays is 1/n, and thus by Lemma 5.1 on page 130, we have
E [Xij] = Pr {person i and person j have the same birthday}

= 1/n.
Letting X be the random variable that counts the number of pairs of

individuals having the same birthday, we have

Taking expectations of both sides and applying linearity of expectation,
we obtain

When k(k 1) 2n, therefore, the expected number of pairs of people

with the same birthday is at least 1. Thus, if we have at least
individuals in a room, we can expect at least two to have the same

birthday. For n = 365, if k = 28, the expected number of pairs with the

same birthday is (28 · 27)/(2 · 365) 1.0356. Thus, with at least 28
people, we expect to find at least one matching pair of birthdays. On
Mars, with 669 days per year, we need at least 38 Martians.

The first analysis, which used only probabilities, determined the

number of people required for the probability to exceed 1/2 that a

matching pair of birthdays exists, and the second analysis, which used

indicator random variables, determined the number such that the

expected number of matching birthdays is 1. Although the exact

numbers of people differ for the two situations, they are the same

asymptotically: .

5.4.2 Balls and bins

Consider a process in which you randomly toss identical balls into b
bins, numbered 1, 2, ... , b. The tosses are independent, and on each

toss the ball is equally likely to end up in any bin. The probability that a

tossed ball lands in any given bin is 1/b. If we view the ball-tossing

process as a sequence of Bernoulli trials (see Appendix C.4), where
success means that the ball falls in the given bin, then each trial has a

probability 1/b of success. This model is particularly useful for analyzing

hashing (see Chapter 11), and we can answer a variety of interesting
questions about the ball-tossing process. (Problem C-2 asks additional
questions about balls and bins.)

How many balls fall in a given bin? The number of balls that fall in
a given bin follows the binomial distribution b(k;n, 1/b). If you
toss n balls, equation (C.41) on page 1199 tells us that the
expected number of balls that fall in the given bin is n/b.

How many balls must you toss, on the average, until a given bin
contains a ball? The number of tosses until the given bin receives a
ball follows the geometric distribution with probability 1/b and, by

equation (C.36) on page 1197, the expected number of tosses until

success is 1/(1/b) = b.

How many balls must you toss until every bin contains at least one
ball? Let us call a toss in which a ball falls into an empty bin a
"hit." We want to know the expected number n of tosses required
to get b hits.

Using the hits, we can partition the n tosses into stages. The ith
stage consists of the tosses after the (i 1)st hit up to and

including the ith hit. The first stage consists of the first toss, since

you are guaranteed to have a hit when all bins are empty. For

each toss during the ith stage, i 1 bins contain balls and b i + 1
bins are empty. Thus, for each toss in the ith stage, the probability
of obtaining a hit is (b i + 1)/b.

Let ni denote the number of tosses in the ith stage. The number of

tosses required to get b hits is . Each random variable

ni has a geometric distribution with probability of success (b i +

1)/b and thus, by equation (C.36), we have

By linearity of expectation, we have

It therefore takes approximately b ln b tosses before we can

expect that every bin has a ball. This problem is also known as the

coupon collector's problem, which says that if you are trying to
collect each of b different coupons, then you should expect to
acquire approximately b ln b randomly obtained coupons in order

to succeed.

5.4.3 Streaks

Suppose that you flip a fair coin n times. What is the longest streak of

consecutive heads that you expect to see? We'll prove upper and lower

bounds separately to show that the answer is (lg n).

We first prove that the expected length of the longest streak of heads

is O(lg n). The probability that each coin flip is a head is 1/2. Let Aik be
the event that a streak of heads of length at least k begins with the ith
coin flip or, more precisely, the event that the k consecutive coin flips i, i
+ 1, ... , i + k 1 yield only heads, where 1 k n and 1 i n k + 1.
Since coin flips are mutually independent, for any given event Aik, the
probability that all k flips are heads is

and thus the probability that a streak of heads of length at least 2 lg n
begins in position i is quite small. There are at most n 2 lg n + 1

positions where such a streak can begin. The probability that a streak

of heads of length at least 2 lg n begins anywhere is therefore

We can use inequality (5.10) to bound the length of the longest

streak. For j = 0, 1, 2, ... , n, let Lj be the event that the longest streak
of heads has length exactly j, and let L be the length of the longest

streak. By the definition of expected value, we have

We could try to evaluate this sum using upper bounds on each Pr {Lj}

similar to those computed in inequality (5.10). Unfortunately, this

method yields weak bounds. We can use some intuition gained by the

above analysis to obtain a good bound, however. For no individual term

in the summation in equation (5.11) are both the factors j and Pr {Lj}

large. Why? When j 2 lg n, then Pr {Lj} is very small, and when j < 2

lg n, then j is fairly small. More precisely, since the events Lj for j = 0,

1, ... , n are disjoint, the probability that a streak of heads of length at

least 2 lg n begins anywhere is . Inequality (5.10) tells us

that the probability that a streak of heads of length at least 2 lg n

begins anywhere is less than 1/n, which means that .

Also, noting that , we have that . Thus,
we obtain

The probability that a streak of heads exceeds r lg n flips
diminishes quickly with r. Let's get a rough bound on the probability
that a streak of at least r lg n heads occurs, for r 1. The probability
that a streak of at least r lg n heads starts in position i is

A streak of at least r lg n heads cannot start in the last n r lg n + 1

flips, but let's overestimate the probability of such a streak by allowing it

to start anywhere within the n coin flips. Then the probability that a
streak of at least r lg n heads occurs is at most

Equivalently, the probability is at least 1 1/nr1 that the longest streak
has length less than r lg n.

As an example, during n = 1000 coin flips, the probability of
encountering a streak of at least 2 lg n = 20 heads is at most 1/n =
1/1000. The chance of a streak of at least 3 lg n = 30 heads is at most

1/n2 = 1/1,000,000.

Let's now prove a complementary lower bound: the expected length

of the longest streak of heads in n coin flips is (lg n). To prove this
bound, we look for streaks of length s by partitioning the n flips into
approximately n/s groups of s flips each. If we choose s = (lg n)/2, we'll

see that it is likely that at least one of these groups comes up all heads,

which means that it's likely that the longest streak has length at least s =
(lg n). We'll then show that the longest streak has expected length (lg
n).

Let's partition the n coin flips into at least n/ (lg n)/2 groups of
(lg n)/2 consecutive flips and bound the probability that no group

comes up all heads. By equation (5.9), the probability that the group

starting in position i comes up all heads is

The probability that a streak of heads of length at least (lg n)/2 does

not begin in position i is therefore at most . Since the n/ (lg

n)/2 groups are formed from mutually exclusive, independent coin

flips, the probability that every one of these groups fails to be a streak

of length (lg n)/2 is at most

For this argument, we used inequality (3.14), 1 + x ex, on page 66 and

the fact, which you may verify, that for sufficiently

large n.

We want to bound the probability that the longest streak equals or

exceeds (lg n)/2. To do so, let L be the event that the longest streak of

heads equals or exceeds s = (lg n)/2. Let L be the complementary

event, that the longest streak of heads is strictly less than s, so that Pr

{L} + Pr {L} = 1. Let F be the event that every group of s flips fails to

be a streak of s heads. By inequality (5.12), we have Pr {F} = O(1/n). If

the longest streak of heads is less than s, then certainly every group of s

flips fails to be a streak of s heads, which means that event L implies

event F. Of course, event F could occur even if event L does not (for

example, if a streak of s or more heads crosses over the boundary

between two groups), and so we have Pr {L} Pr {F} = O(1/n). Since

Pr {L} + Pr {L} = 1, we have that

Pr {L} = 1 Pr {L}
1 Pr {F}
= 1 O(1/n).

That is, the probability that the longest streak equals or exceeds (lg

n)/2 is

We can now calculate a lower bound on the expected length of the
longest streak, beginning with equation (5.11) and proceeding in a
manner similar to our analysis of the upper bound:

As with the birthday paradox, we can obtain a simpler, but
approximate, analysis using indicator random variables. Instead of
determining the expected length of the longest streak, we'll find the

expected number of streaks with at least a given length. Let Xik = I
{Aik} be the indicator random variable associated with a streak of
heads of length at least k beginning with the ith coin flip. To count the

total number of such streaks, define

Taking expectations and using linearity of expectation, we have

By plugging in various values for k, we can calculate the expected
number of streaks of length at least k. If this expected number is large
(much greater than 1), then we expect many streaks of length k to

occur, and the probability that one occurs is high. If this expected
number is small (much less than 1), then we expect to see few streaks of

length k, and the probability that one occurs is low. If k = c lg n, for
some positive constant c, we obtain

If c is large, the expected number of streaks of length c lg n is small, and
we conclude that they are unlikely to occur. On the other hand, if c =
1/2, then we obtain E [X(1/2) lg n] = (1/n1/21) = (n1/2), and we
expect there to be numerous streaks of length (1/2) lg n. Therefore, one

streak of such a length is likely to occur. We can conclude that the

expected length of the longest streak is (lg n).

5.4.4 The online hiring problem

As a final example, let's consider a variant of the hiring problem.

Suppose now that you do not wish to interview all the candidates in

order to find the best one. You also want to avoid hiring and firing as

you find better and better applicants. Instead, you are willing to settle

for a candidate who is close to the best, in exchange for hiring exactly

once. You must obey one company requirement: after each interview

you must either immediately offer the position to the applicant or

immediately reject the applicant. What is the trade-off between

minimizing the amount of interviewing and maximizing the quality of

the candidate hired?

We can model this problem in the following way. After meeting an

applicant, you are able to give each one a score. Let score(i) denote the
score you give to the ith applicant, and assume that no two applicants
receive the same score. After you have seen j applicants, you know
which of the j has the highest score, but you do not know whether any
of the remaining n j applicants will receive a higher score. You decide
to adopt the strategy of selecting a positive integer k < n, interviewing
and then rejecting the first k applicants, and hiring the first applicant

thereafter who has a higher score than all preceding applicants. If it

turns out that the best-qualified applicant was among the first k
interviewed, then you hire the nth applicant--the last one interviewed.
We formalize this strategy in the procedure ONLINE-MAXIMUM(k,
n), which returns the index of the candidate you wish to hire.

ONLINE-MAXIMUM(k, n)

1 best-score =
2 for i = 1 to k

3 if score(i) > best-score

4 best-score = score(i)

5 for i = k + 1 to n

6 if score(i) > best-score

7 return i

8 return n

If we determine, for each possible value of k, the probability that you

hire the most qualified applicant, then you can choose the best possible

k and implement the strategy with that value. For the moment, assume

that k is fixed. Let M(j) = max {score(i) : 1 i j} denote the maximum

score among applicants 1 through j. Let S be the event that you succeed

in choosing the best-qualified applicant, and let Si be the event that you

succeed when the best-qualified applicant is the ith one interviewed.

Since the various Si are disjoint, we have that .

Noting that you never succeed when the best-qualified applicant is one

of the first k, we have that Pr {Si} = 0 for i = 1, 2, ... , k. Thus, we

obtain

We now compute Pr {Si}. In order to succeed when the bestqualified applicant is the ith one, two things must happen. First, the
best-qualified applicant must be in position i, an event which we denote
by Bi. Second, the algorithm must not select any of the applicants in
positions k + 1 through i 1, which happens only if, for each j such that
k + 1 j i 1, line 6 finds that score(j) < best-score. (Because scores
are unique, we can ignore the possibility of score(j) = best-score.) In
other words, all of the values score(k + 1) through score(i 1) must be
less than M(k). If any are greater than M(k), the algorithm instead
returns the index of the first one that is greater. We use Oi to denote the
event that none of the applicants in position k + 1 through i 1 are
chosen. Fortunately, the two events Bi and Oi are independent. The
event Oi depends only on the relative ordering of the values in positions
1 through i 1, whereas Bi depends only on whether the value in
position i is greater than the values in all other positions. The ordering
of the values in positions 1 through i 1 does not affect whether the
value in position i is greater than all of them, and the value in position i
does not affect the ordering of the values in positions 1 through i 1.

Thus, we can apply equation (C.17) on page 1188 to obtain

Pr {Si} = Pr {Bi Oi} = Pr {Bi} Pr {Oi}.
We have Pr {Bi} = 1/n since the maximum is equally likely to be in any
one of the n positions. For event Oi to occur, the maximum value in
positions 1 through i 1, which is equally likely to be in any of these i 1
positions, must be in one of the first k positions. Consequently, Pr {Oi}
= k/(i 1) and Pr {Si} = k/(n(i 1)). Using equation (5.14), we have

We approximate by integrals to bound this summation from above and
below. By the inequalities (A.19) on page 1150, we have

Evaluating these definite integrals gives us the bounds

which provide a rather tight bound for Pr {S}. Because you wish to

maximize your probability of success, let us focus on choosing the value

of k that maximizes the lower bound on Pr {S}. (Besides, the lower-

bound expression is easier to maximize than the upper-bound

expression.) Differentiating the expression (k/n)(ln n ln k) with respect
to k, we obtain

Setting this derivative equal to 0, we see that you maximize the lower

bound on the probability when ln k = ln n 1 = ln(n/e) or, equivalently,
when k = n/e. Thus, if you implement our strategy with k = n/e, you

succeed in hiring the best-qualified applicant with probability at least

1/e.

Exercises

5.4-1

How many people must there be in a room before the probability that
someone has the same birthday as you do is at least 1/2? How many
people must there be before the probability that at least two people have
a birthday on July 4 is greater than 1/2?

5.4-2

How many people must there be in a room before the probability that
two people have the same birthday is at least 0.99? For that many
people, what is the expected number of pairs of people who have the
same birthday?

5.4-3
You toss balls into b bins until some bin contains two balls. Each toss is

independent, and each ball is equally likely to end up in any bin. What is
the expected number of ball tosses?

5.4-4

For the analysis of the birthday paradox, is it important that the
birthdays be mutually independent, or is pairwise independence
sufficient? Justify your answer.

5.4-5

How many people should be invited to a party in order to make it likely

that there are three people with the same birthday?

5.4-6
What is the probability that a k-string (defined on page 1179) over a set
of size n forms a k-permutation? How does this question relate to the

birthday paradox?

5.4-7
You toss n balls into n bins, where each toss is independent and the ball

is equally likely to end up in any bin. What is the expected number of
empty bins? What is the expected number of bins with exactly one ball?

5.4-8
Sharpen the lower bound on streak length by showing that in n flips of a
fair coin, the probability is at least 1 1/n that a streak of length lg n 2
lg lg n consecutive heads occurs.

Problems

5-1 Probabilistic counting

With a b-bit counter, we can ordinarily only count up to 2b 1. With R.
Morris's probabilistic counting, we can count up to a much larger value

at the expense of some loss of precision.

We let a counter value of i represent a count of ni for i = 0, 1, ... , 2b
1, where the ni form an increasing sequence of nonnegative values. We

assume that the initial value of the counter is 0, representing a count of

n0 = 0. The INCREMENT operation works on a counter containing
the value i in a probabilistic manner. If i = 2b 1, then the operation

reports an overflow error. Otherwise, the INCREMENT operation

increases the counter by 1 with probability 1/(ni + 1 ni), and it leaves
the counter unchanged with probability 1 1/(ni + 1 ni).

If we select ni = i for all i 0, then the counter is an ordinary one.
More interesting situations arise if we select, say, ni = 2i 1 for i > 0 or
ni = Fi (the ith Fibonacci number--see equation (3.31) on page 69).

For this problem, assume that is large enough that the

probability of an overflow error is negligible.

a. Show that the expected value represented by the counter after n
INCREMENT operations have been performed is exactly n.

b. The analysis of the variance of the count represented by the counter
depends on the sequence of the ni. Let us consider a simple case: ni =
100i for all i 0. Estimate the variance in the value represented by the
register after n INCREMENT operations have been performed.

5-2 Searching an unsorted array
This problem examines three algorithms for searching for a value x in
an unsorted array A consisting of n elements.

Consider the following randomized strategy: pick a random index i
into A. If A[i] = x, then terminate; otherwise, continue the search by
picking a new random index into A. Continue picking random indices
into A until you find an index j such that A[j] = x or until every element
of A has been checked. This strategy may examine a given element more

than once, because it picks from the whole set of indices each time.

a. Write pseudocode for a procedure RANDOM-SEARCH to

implement the strategy above. Be sure that your algorithm terminates

when all indices into A have been picked.

b. Suppose that there is exactly one index i such that A[i] = x. What is
the expected number of indices into A that must be picked before x is

found and RANDOM-SEARCH terminates?

c. Generalizing your solution to part (b), suppose that there are k 1
indices i such that A[i] = x. What is the expected number of indices
into A that must be picked before x is found and RANDOM-
SEARCH terminates? Your answer should be a function of n and k.

d. Suppose that there are no indices i such that A[i] = x. What is the
expected number of indices into A that must be picked before all
elements of A have been checked and RANDOM-SEARCH

terminates?

Now consider a deterministic linear search algorithm. The algorithm,

which we call DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH, searches A for x in order,

considering A[1], A[2], A[3], ... , A[n] until either it finds A[i] = x or it

reaches the end of the array. Assume that all possible permutations of
the input array are equally likely.

e. Suppose that there is exactly one index i such that A[i] = x. What is

the average-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?
What is the worst-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-
SEARCH?

f. Generalizing your solution to part (e), suppose that there are k 1
indices i such that A[i] = x. What is the average-case running time of

DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH? What is the worst-case running time
of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH? Your answer should be a function

of n and k.

g. Suppose that there are no indices i such that A[i] = x. What is the

average-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH? What is
the worst-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?

Finally, consider a randomized algorithm SCRAMBLE-SEARCH that
first randomly permutes the input array and then runs the deterministic
linear search given above on the resulting permuted array.

h. Letting k be the number of indices i such that A[i] = x, give the worst-

case and expected running times of SCRAMBLE-SEARCH for the

cases in which k = 0 and k = 1. Generalize your solution to handle the
case in which k 1.

i. Which of the three searching algorithms would you use? Explain your

answer.

Chapter notes

Bollobás [65], Hofri [223], and Spencer [420] contain a wealth of
advanced probabilistic techniques. The advantages of randomized
algorithms are discussed and surveyed by Karp [249] and Rabin [372].
The textbook by Motwani and Raghavan [336] gives an extensive
treatment of randomized algorithms.

The RANDOMLY-PERMUTE procedure is by Durstenfeld [128],
based on an earlier procedure by Fisher and Yates [143, p. 34].

Several variants of the hiring problem have been widely studied.
These problems are more commonly referred to as "secretary
problems." Examples of work in this area are the paper by Ajtai,
Meggido, and Waarts [11] and another by Kleinberg [258], which ties
the secretary problem to online ad auctions.

Part II Sorting and Order Statistics

Introduction

This part presents several algorithms that solve the following sorting
problem:

Input: A sequence of n numbers a1, a2, ... , an.

Output: A permutation (reordering) of the input sequence

such that .

The input sequence is usually an n-element array, although it may be

represented in some other fashion, such as a linked list.

The structure of the data

In practice, the numbers to be sorted are rarely isolated values. Each is

usually part of a collection of data called a record. Each record contains
a key, which is the value to be sorted. The remainder of the record
consists of satellite data, which are usually carried around with the key.

In practice, when a sorting algorithm permutes the keys, it must
permute the satellite data as well. If each record includes a large
amount of satellite data, it often pays to permute an array of pointers
to the records rather than the records themselves in order to minimize
data movement.

In a sense, it is these implementation details that distinguish an
algorithm from a full-blown program. A sorting algorithm describes the

method to determine the sorted order, regardless of whether what's

being sorted are individual numbers or large records containing many

bytes of satellite data. Thus, when focusing on the problem of sorting,
we typically assume that the input consists only of numbers. Translating
an algorithm for sorting numbers into a program for sorting records is
conceptually straightforward, although in a given engineering situation
other subtleties may make the actual programming task a challenge.

Why sorting?

Many computer scientists consider sorting to be the most fundamental
problem in the study of algorithms. There are several reasons:

Sometimes an application inherently needs to sort information.
For example, in order to prepare customer statements, banks
need to sort checks by check number.

Algorithms often use sorting as a key subroutine. For example, a
program that renders graphical objects which are layered on top
of each other might have to sort the objects according to an
"above" relation so that it can draw these objects from bottom to
top. We will see numerous algorithms in this text that use sorting
as a subroutine.

We can draw from among a wide variety of sorting algorithms,
and they employ a rich set of techniques. In fact, many important
techniques used throughout algorithm design appear in sorting
algorithms that have been developed over the years. In this way,
sorting is also a problem of historical interest.

We can prove a nontrivial lower bound for sorting (as we'll do in
Chapter 8). Since the best upper bounds match the lower bound
asymptotically, we can conclude that certain of our sorting
algorithms are asymptotically optimal. Moreover, we can use the
lower bound for sorting to prove lower bounds for various other
problems.

Many engineering issues come to the fore when implementing
sorting algorithms. The fastest sorting program for a particular
situation may depend on many factors, such as prior knowledge
about the keys and satellite data, the memory hierarchy (caches

and virtual memory) of the host computer, and the software
environment. Many of these issues are best dealt with at the
algorithmic level, rather than by "tweaking" the code.

Sorting algorithms

We introduced two algorithms that sort n real numbers in Chapter 2.
Insertion sort takes (n2) time in the worst case. Because its inner loops

are tight, however, it is a fast sorting algorithm for small input sizes.

Moreover, unlike merge sort, it sorts in place, meaning that at most a

constant number of elements of the input array are ever stored outside
the array, which can be advantageous for space efficiency. Merge sort

has a better asymptotic running time, (n lg n), but the MERGE

procedure it uses does not operate in place. (We'll see a parallelized
version of merge sort in Section 26.3.)

This part introduces two more algorithms that sort arbitrary real

numbers. Heapsort, presented in Chapter 6, sorts n numbers in place in
O(n lg n) time. It uses an important data structure, called a heap, which

can also implement a priority queue.

Quicksort, in Chapter 7, also sorts n numbers in place, but its worstcase running time is (n2). Its expected running time is (n lg n),

however, and it generally outperforms heapsort in practice. Like
insertion sort, quicksort has tight code, and so the hidden constant
factor in its running time is small. It is a popular algorithm for sorting
large arrays.

Insertion sort, merge sort, heapsort, and quicksort are all
comparison sorts: they determine the sorted order of an input array by
comparing elements. Chapter 8 begins by introducing the decision-tree
model in order to study the performance limitations of comparison

sorts. Using this model, we prove a lower bound of (n lg n) on the
worst-case running time of any comparison sort on n inputs, thus

showing that heapsort and merge sort are asymptotically optimal
comparison sorts.

Chapter 8 then goes on to show that we might be able to beat this

lower bound of (n lg n) if an algorithm can gather information about

the sorted order of the input by means other than comparing elements.

The counting sort algorithm, for example, assumes that the input

numbers belong to the set {0, 1, ... , k}. By using array indexing as a
tool for determining relative order, counting sort can sort n numbers in
(k + n) time. Thus, when k = O(n), counting sort runs in time that is

linear in the size of the input array. A related algorithm, radix sort, can

be used to extend the range of counting sort. If there are n integers to
sort, each integer has d digits, and each digit can take on up to k
possible values, then radix sort can sort the numbers in (d(n + k))
time. When d is a constant and k is O(n), radix sort runs in linear time.

A third algorithm, bucket sort, requires knowledge of the probabilistic

distribution of numbers in the input array. It can sort n real numbers

uniformly distributed in the half-open interval [0, 1) in average-case

O(n) time.

The table on the following page summarizes the running times of the

sorting algorithms from Chapters 2 and 68. As usual, n denotes the

number of items to sort. For counting sort, the items to sort are

integers in the set {0, 1, ... , k}. For radix sort, each item is a d-digit
number, where each digit takes on k possible values. For bucket sort, we

assume that the keys are real numbers uniformly distributed in the half-

open interval [0, 1). The rightmost column gives the average-case or

expected running time, indicating which one it gives when it differs from

the worst-case running time. We omit the average-case running time of

heapsort because we do not analyze it in this book.

Worst-case Average-case/expected
running time
Algorithm running time
(n2)
Insertion (n2)
(n lg n)
sort
--
Merge (n lg n)
sort (n lg n) (expected)
(k + n)
Heapsort O(n lg n)

Quicksort (n2)

Counting (k + n)

sort

Radix (d(n + k)) (d(n + k))
sort (n2) (n) (average-case)
Bucket
sort

Order statistics

The ith order statistic of a set of n numbers is the ith smallest number in
the set. You can, of course, select the ith order statistic by sorting the
input and indexing the ith element of the output. With no assumptions
about the input distribution, this method runs in (n lg n) time, as the

lower bound proved in Chapter 8 shows.

Chapter 9 shows how to find the ith smallest element in O(n) time,

even when the elements are arbitrary real numbers. We present a

randomized algorithm with tight pseudocode that runs in (n2) time in
the worst case, but whose expected running time is O(n). We also give a
more complicated algorithm that runs in O(n) worst-case time.

Background

Although most of this part does not rely on difficult mathematics, some
sections do require mathematical sophistication. In particular, analyses
of quicksort, bucket sort, and the order-statistic algorithm use
probability, which is reviewed in Appendix C, and the material on
probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms in Chapter 5.

6 Heapsort

This chapter introduces another sorting algorithm: heapsort. Like

merge sort, but unlike insertion sort, heapsort's running time is O(n lg
n). Like insertion sort, but unlike merge sort, heapsort sorts in place:

only a constant number of array elements are stored outside the input
array at any time. Thus, heapsort combines the better attributes of the
two sorting algorithms we have already discussed.

Heapsort also introduces another algorithm design technique: using
a data structure, in this case one we call a "heap," to manage
information. Not only is the heap data structure useful for heapsort,
but it also makes an efficient priority queue. The heap data structure
will reappear in algorithms in later chapters.

The term "heap" was originally coined in the context of heapsort,
but it has since come to refer to "garbage-collected storage," such as
the programming languages Java and Python provide. Please don't be

confused. The heap data structure is not garbage-collected storage. This

book is consistent in using the term "heap" to refer to the data
structure, not the storage class.