6.1 Heaps

The (binary) heap data structure is an array object that we can view as

a nearly complete binary tree (see Section B.5.3), as shown in Figure
6.1. Each node of the tree corresponds to an element of the array. The
tree is completely filled on all levels except possibly the lowest, which is

filled from the left up to a point. An array A[1 : n] that represents a heap
is an object with an attribute A.heap-size, which represents how many
elements in the heap are stored within array A. That is, although A[1 : n]
may contain numbers, only the elements in A[1 : A.heap-size], where 0
A.heap-size n, are valid elements of the heap. If A.heap-size = 0, then
the heap is empty. The root of the tree is A[1], and given the index i of a

node, there's a simple way to compute the indices of its parent, left
child, and right child with the one-line procedures PARENT, LEFT,
and RIGHT.

Figure 6.1 A max-heap viewed as (a) a binary tree and (b) an array. The number within the
circle at each node in the tree is the value stored at that node. The number above a node is the
corresponding index in the array. Above and below the array are lines showing parent-child
relationships, with parents always to the left of their children. The tree has height 3, and the
node at index 4 (with value 8) has height 1.

PARENT(i)
1return i/2
LEFT(i)
1return 2i
RIGHT(i)
1return 2i + 1

On most computers, the LEFT procedure can compute 2i in one
instruction by simply shifting the binary representation of i left by one

bit position. Similarly, the RIGHT procedure can quickly compute 2i +
1 by shifting the binary representation of i left by one bit position and
then adding 1. The PARENT procedure can compute i/2 by shifting i

right one bit position. Good implementations of heapsort often
implement these procedures as macros or inline procedures.

There are two kinds of binary heaps: max-heaps and min-heaps. In

both kinds, the values in the nodes satisfy a heap property, the specifics
of which depend on the kind of heap. In a max-heap, the max-heap
property is that for every node i other than the root,

A[PARENT(i)] A[i],

that is, the value of a node is at most the value of its parent. Thus, the
largest element in a max-heap is stored at the root, and the subtree
rooted at a node contains values no larger than that contained at the

node itself. A min-heap is organized in the opposite way: the min-heap
property is that for every node i other than the root,

A[PARENT(i)] A[i].

The smallest element in a min-heap is at the root.
The heapsort algorithm uses max-heaps. Min-heaps commonly

implement priority queues, which we discuss in Section 6.5. We'll be
precise in specifying whether we need a max-heap or a min-heap for any
particular application, and when properties apply to either max-heaps
or min-heaps, we just use the term "heap."

Viewing a heap as a tree, we define the height of a node in a heap to

be the number of edges on the longest simple downward path from the
node to a leaf, and we define the height of the heap to be the height of

its root. Since a heap of n elements is based on a complete binary tree,
its height is (lg n) (see Exercise 6.1-2). As we'll see, the basic

operations on heaps run in time at most proportional to the height of

the tree and thus take O(lg n) time. The remainder of this chapter

presents some basic procedures and shows how they are used in a
sorting algorithm and a priority-queue data structure.

The MAX-HEAPIFY procedure, which runs in O(lg n) time, is

the key to maintaining the max-heap property.

The BUILD-MAX-HEAP procedure, which runs in linear time,
produces a max-heap from an unordered input array.

The HEAPSORT procedure, which runs in O(n lg n) time, sorts an

array in place.

The procedures MAX-HEAP-INSERT, MAX-HEAP-
EXTRACT-MAX, MAX-HEAP-INCREASE-KEY, and MAX-
HEAP-MAXIMUM allow the heap data structure to implement

a priority queue. They run in O(lg n) time plus the time for

mapping between objects being inserted into the priority queue
and indices in the heap.

Exercises

6.1-1

What are the minimum and maximum numbers of elements in a heap of

height h?

6.1-2
Show that an n-element heap has height lg n.

6.1-3

Show that in any subtree of a max-heap, the root of the subtree
contains the largest value occurring anywhere in that subtree.

6.1-4

Where in a max-heap might the smallest element reside, assuming that
all elements are distinct?

6.1-5
At which levels in a max-heap might the kth largest element reside, for 2
k n/2, assuming that all elements are distinct?

6.1-6

Is an array that is in sorted order a min-heap?

6.1-7

Is the array with values 33, 19, 20, 15, 13, 10, 2, 13, 16, 12 a max-heap?

6.1-8
Show that, with the array representation for storing an n-element heap,
the leaves are the nodes indexed by n/2 + 1, n/2 + 2, ... , n.