6.3 Building a heap

The procedure BUILD-MAX-HEAP converts an array A[1 : n] into a

max-heap by calling MAX-HEAPIFY in a bottom-up manner. Exercise

6.1-8 says that the elements in the subarray A[n/2 + 1 : n] are all leaves

of the tree, and so each is a 1-element heap to begin with. BUILDMAX-HEAP goes through the remaining nodes of the tree and runs
MAX-HEAPIFY on each one. Figure 6.3 shows an example of the
action of BUILD-MAX-HEAP.

BUILD-MAX-HEAP(A, n)
1 A.heap-size = n

2 for i = n/2 downto 1
3 MAX-HEAPIFY(A, i)

To show why BUILD-MAX-HEAP works correctly, we use the
following loop invariant:

At the start of each iteration of the for loop of lines 23, each

node i + 1, i + 2, ... , n is the root of a max-heap.

We need to show that this invariant is true prior to the first loop
iteration, that each iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, that
the loop terminates, and that the invariant provides a useful property to
show correctness when the loop terminates.

Initialization: Prior to the first iteration of the loop, i = n/2. Each node
n/2 + 1, n/2 + 2, ... , n is a leaf and is thus the root of a trivial

max-heap.

Maintenance: To see that each iteration maintains the loop invariant,

observe that the children of node i are numbered higher than i. By the

loop invariant, therefore, they are both roots of max-heaps. This is

precisely the condition required for the call MAX-HEAPIFY(A, i) to
make node i a max-heap root. Moreover, the MAX-HEAPIFY call
preserves the property that nodes i + 1, i + 2, ... , n are all roots of
max-heaps. Decrementing i in the for loop update reestablishes the

loop invariant for the next iteration.

Figure 6.3 The operation of BUILD-MAX-HEAP, showing the data structure before the call

to MAX-HEAPIFY in line 3 of BUILD-MAX-HEAP. The node indexed by i in each iteration
is shown in blue. (a) A 10-element input array A and the binary tree it represents. The loop
index i refers to node 5 before the call MAX-HEAPIFY(A, i). (b) The data structure that
results. The loop index i for the next iteration refers to node 4. (c)(e) Subsequent iterations of

the for loop in BUILD-MAX-HEAP. Observe that whenever MAX-HEAPIFY is called on a
node, the two subtrees of that node are both max-heaps. (f) The max-heap after BUILDMAX-HEAP finishes.

Termination: The loop makes exactly n/2 iterations, and so it
terminates. At termination, i = 0. By the loop invariant, each node 1,
2, ... , n is the root of a max-heap. In particular, node 1 is.

We can compute a simple upper bound on the running time of
BUILD-MAX-HEAP as follows. Each call to MAX-HEAPIFY costs

O(lg n) time, and BUILD-MAX-HEAP makes O(n) such calls. Thus, the
running time is O(n lg n). This upper bound, though correct, is not as

tight as it can be.

We can derive a tighter asymptotic bound by observing that the time

for MAX-HEAPIFY to run at a node varies with the height of the node

in the tree, and that the heights of most nodes are small. Our tighter

analysis relies on the properties that an n-element heap has height lg n
(see Exercise 6.1-2) and at most n/2h + 1 nodes of any height h (see

Exercise 6.3-4).

The time required by MAX-HEAPIFY when called on a node of

height h is O(h). Letting c be the constant implicit in the asymptotic

notation, we can express the total cost of BUILD-MAX-HEAP as

being bounded from above by . As Exercise 6.3-2 shows,

we have n/2h + 1 1/2 for 0 h lg n. Since x 2x for any x 1/2,

we have n/2h + 1 n/2h. We thus obtain

Hence, we can build a max-heap from an unordered array in linear time.
To build a min-heap, use the procedure BUILD-MIN-HEAP, which

is the same as BUILD-MAX-HEAP but with the call to MAXHEAPIFY in line 3 replaced by a call to MIN-HEAPIFY (see Exercise
6.2-3). BUILD-MIN-HEAP produces a min-heap from an unordered
linear array in linear time.

Exercises

6.3-1

Using Figure 6.3 as a model, illustrate the operation of BUILD-MAX-

HEAP on the array A = 5, 3, 17, 10, 84, 19, 6, 22, 9.

6.3-2
Show that n/2h + 1 1/2 for 0 h lg n.

6.3-3
Why does the loop index i in line 2 of BUILD-MAX-HEAP decrease
from n/2 to 1 rather than increase from 1 to n/2?

6.3-4
Show that there are at most n/2h + 1 nodes of height h in any n-

element heap.