6.4 The heapsort algorithm

The heapsort algorithm, given by the procedure HEAPSORT, starts by
calling the BUILD-MAX-HEAP procedure to build a max-heap on the

input array A[1 : n]. Since the maximum element of the array is stored at
the root A[1], HEAPSORT can place it into its correct final position by
exchanging it with A[n]. If the procedure then discards node n from the
heap--and it can do so by simply decrementing A.heap-size--the

children of the root remain max-heaps, but the new root element might
violate the max-heap property. To restore the max-heap property, the

procedure just calls MAX-HEAPIFY(A, 1), which leaves a max-heap in
A[1 : n 1]. The HEAPSORT procedure then repeats this process for
the max-heap of size n 1 down to a heap of size 2. (See Exercise 6.4-2

for a precise loop invariant.)

HEAPSORT(A, n)
1 BUILD-MAX-HEAP(A, n)
2 for i = n downto 2

3 exchange A[1] with A[i]
4 A.heap-size = A.heap-size 1
5 MAX-HEAPIFY(A, 1)

Figure 6.4 shows an example of the operation of HEAPSORT after
line 1 has built the initial max-heap. The figure shows the max-heap
before the first iteration of the for loop of lines 25 and after each
iteration.

Figure 6.4 The operation of HEAPSORT. (a) The max-heap data structure just after BUILDMAX-HEAP has built it in line 1. (b)(j) The max-heap just after each call of MAX-

HEAPIFY in line 5, showing the value of i at that time. Only blue nodes remain in the heap.

Tan nodes contain the largest values in the array, in sorted order. (k) The resulting sorted

array A.

The HEAPSORT procedure takes O(n lg n) time, since the call to
BUILD-MAX-HEAP takes O(n) time and each of the n 1 calls to
MAX-HEAPIFY takes O(lg n) time.

Exercises

6.4-1

Using Figure 6.4 as a model, illustrate the operation of HEAPSORT on

the array A = 5, 13, 2, 25, 7, 17, 20, 8, 4.

6.4-2

Argue the correctness of HEAPSORT using the following loop
invariant:

At the start of each iteration of the for loop of lines 25, the

subarray A[1 : i] is a max-heap containing the i smallest
elements of A[1 : n], and the subarray A[i + 1 : n] contains the n
i largest elements of A[1 : n], sorted.

6.4-3
What is the running time of HEAPSORT on an array A of length n that

is already sorted in increasing order? How about if the array is already
sorted in decreasing order?

6.4-4
Show that the worst-case running time of HEAPSORT is (n lg n).

6.4-5
Show that when all the elements of A are distinct, the best-case running
time of HEAPSORT is (n lg n).