7.2 Performance of quicksort

The running time of quicksort depends on how balanced each
partitioning is, which in turn depends on which elements are used as
pivots. If the two sides of a partition are about the same size--the
partitioning is balanced--then the algorithm runs asymptotically as fast
as merge sort. If the partitioning is unbalanced, however, it can run
asymptotically as slowly as insertion sort. To allow you to gain some
intuition before diving into a formal analysis, this section informally
investigates how quicksort performs under the assumptions of balanced
versus unbalanced partitioning.

But first, let's briefly look at the maximum amount of memory that
quicksort requires. Although quicksort sorts in place according to the
definition on page 158, the amount of memory it uses--aside from the
array being sorted--is not constant. Since each recursive call requires a
constant amount of space on the runtime stack, outside of the array
being sorted, quicksort requires space proportional to the maximum

depth of the recursion. As we'll see now, that could be as bad as (n) in

the worst case.

Worst-case partitioning

The worst-case behavior for quicksort occurs when the partitioning

produces one subproblem with n 1 elements and one with 0 elements.

(See Section 7.4.1.) Let us assume that this unbalanced partitioning

arises in each recursive call. The partitioning costs (n) time. Since the

recursive call on an array of size 0 just returns without doing anything,

T (0) = (1), and the recurrence for the running time is

T (n) = T (n 1) + T (0) + (n)
= T (n 1) + (n).

By summing the costs incurred at each level of the recursion, we obtain
an arithmetic series (equation (A.3) on page 1141), which evaluates to

(n2). Indeed, the substitution method can be used to prove that the
recurrence T (n) = T (n 1) + (n) has the solution T (n) = (n2). (See

Exercise 7.2-1.)
Thus, if the partitioning is maximally unbalanced at every recursive

level of the algorithm, the running time is (n2). The worst-case

running time of quicksort is therefore no better than that of insertion

sort. Moreover, the (n2) running time occurs when the input array is

already completely sorted--a situation in which insertion sort runs in

O(n) time.

Best-case partitioning

In the most even possible split, PARTITION produces two

subproblems, each of size no more than n/2, since one is of size (n
1)/2 n/2 and one of size (n 1)/2 1 n/2. In this case, quicksort

runs much faster. An upper bound on the running time can then be
described by the recurrence

T (n) = 2T (n/2) + (n).

By case 2 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1 on page 102), this

recurrence has the solution T (n) = (n lg n). Thus, if the partitioning is

equally balanced at every level of the recursion, an asymptotically
faster algorithm results.

Balanced partitioning

As the analyses in Section 7.4 will show, the average-case running time
of quicksort is much closer to the best case than to the worst case. By
appreciating how the balance of the partitioning affects the recurrence
describing the running time, we can gain an understanding of why.

Suppose, for example, that the partitioning algorithm always
produces a 9-to-1 proportional split, which at first blush seems quite
unbalanced. We then obtain the recurrence

T (n) = T (9n/10) + T (n/10) + (n),

on the running time of quicksort. Figure 7.4 shows the recursion tree

for this recurrence, where for simplicity the (n) driving function has
been replaced by n, which won't affect the asymptotic solution of the

recurrence (as Exercise 4.7-1 on page 118 justifies). Every level of the

tree has cost n, until the recursion bottoms out in a base case at depth
log10 n = (lg n), and then the levels have cost at most n. The recursion
terminates at depth log10/9 n = (lg n). Thus, with a 9-to-1

proportional split at every level of recursion, which intuitively seems

highly unbalanced, quicksort runs in O(n lg n) time--asymptotically the

same as if the split were right down the middle. Indeed, even a 99-to-1

split yields an O(n lg n) running time. In fact, any split of constant
proportionality yields a recursion tree of depth (lg n), where the cost
at each level is O(n). The running time is therefore O(n lg n) whenever

the split has constant proportionality. The ratio of the split affects only

the constant hidden in the O-notation.

Figure 7.4 A recursion tree for QUICKSORT in which PARTITION always produces a 9-to-1

split, yielding a running time of O(n lg n). Nodes show subproblem sizes, with per-level costs

on the right.

Intuition for the average case

To develop a clear notion of the expected behavior of quicksort, we
must assume something about how its inputs are distributed. Because
quicksort determines the sorted order using only comparisons between
input elements, its behavior depends on the relative ordering of the
values in the array elements given as the input, not on the particular
values in the array. As in the probabilistic analysis of the hiring problem
in Section 5.2, assume that all permutations of the input numbers are
equally likely and that the elements are distinct.

When quicksort runs on a random input array, the partitioning is
highly unlikely to happen in the same way at every level, as our informal
analysis has assumed. We expect that some of the splits will be
reasonably well balanced and that some will be fairly unbalanced. For
example, Exercise 7.2-6 asks you to show that about 80% of the time
PARTITION produces a split that is at least as balanced as 9 to 1, and

about 20% of the time it produces a split that is less balanced than 9 to
1.

Figure 7.5 (a) Two levels of a recursion tree for quicksort. The partitioning at the root costs n
and produces a "bad" split: two subarrays of sizes 0 and n 1. The partitioning of the
subarray of size n 1 costs n 1 and produces a "good" split: subarrays of size (n 1)/2 1
and (n 1)/2. (b) A single level of a recursion tree that is well balanced. In both parts, the
partitioning cost for the subproblems shown with blue shading is (n). Yet the subproblems

remaining to be solved in (a), shown with tan shading, are no larger than the corresponding
subproblems remaining to be solved in (b).

In the average case, PARTITION produces a mix of "good" and
"bad" splits. In a recursion tree for an average-case execution of
PARTITION, the good and bad splits are distributed randomly
throughout the tree. Suppose for the sake of intuition that the good and
bad splits alternate levels in the tree, and that the good splits are bestcase splits and the bad splits are worst-case splits. Figure 7.5(a) shows
the splits at two consecutive levels in the recursion tree. At the root of

the tree, the cost is n for partitioning, and the subarrays produced have
sizes n 1 and 0: the worst case. At the next level, the subarray of size n
1 undergoes best-case partitioning into subarrays of size (n 1)/2 1
and (n 1)/2. Let's assume that the base-case cost is 1 for the subarray

of size 0.
The combination of the bad split followed by the good split produces

three subarrays of sizes 0, (n 1)/2 1, and (n 1)/2 at a combined
partitioning cost of (n) + (n 1) = (n). This situation is at most a

constant factor worse than that in Figure 7.5(b), namely, where a single

level of partitioning produces two subarrays of size (n 1)/2, at a cost
of (n). Yet this latter situation is balanced! Intuitively, the (n 1) cost
of the bad split in Figure 7.5(a) can be absorbed into the (n) cost of

the good split, and the resulting split is good. Thus, the running time of

quicksort, when levels alternate between good and bad splits, is like the

running time for good splits alone: still O(n lg n), but with a slightly
larger constant hidden by the O-notation. We'll analyze the expected

running time of a randomized version of quicksort rigorously in Section
7.4.2.

Exercises

7.2-1
Use the substitution method to prove that the recurrence T (n) = T (n
1) + (n) has the solution T (n) = (n2), as claimed at the beginning of

Section 7.2.

7.2-2
What is the running time of QUICKSORT when all elements of array A

have the same value?

7.2-3
Show that the running time of QUICKSORT is (n2) when the array A

contains distinct elements and is sorted in decreasing order.

7.2-4

Banks often record transactions on an account in order of the times of
the transactions, but many people like to receive their bank statements
with checks listed in order by check number. People usually write
checks in order by check number, and merchants usually cash them
with reasonable dispatch. The problem of converting time-oftransaction ordering to check-number ordering is therefore the problem
of sorting almost-sorted input. Explain persuasively why the procedure
INSERTION-SORT might tend to beat the procedure QUICKSORT on
this problem.

7.2-5

Suppose that the splits at every level of quicksort are in the constant
proportion to , where + = 1 and 0 < < 1. Show that the

minimum depth of a leaf in the recursion tree is approximately log1/ n

and that the maximum depth is approximately log1/ n. (Don't worry

about integer round-off.)

7.2-6

Consider an array with distinct elements and for which all permutations
of the elements are equally likely. Argue that for any constant 0 <
1/2, the probability is approximately 1 2 that PARTITION produces
a split at least as balanced as 1 to .