8.1 Lower bounds for sorting

A comparison sort uses only comparisons between elements to gain

order information about an input sequence a1, a2, ... , an. That is,
given two elements ai and aj, it performs one of the tests ai < aj, ai aj,

ai = aj, ai aj, or ai > aj to determine their relative order. It may not

inspect the values of the elements or gain order information about them
in any other way.

Since we are proving a lower bound, we assume without loss of
generality in this section that all the input elements are distinct. After
all, a lower bound for distinct elements applies when elements may or

may not be distinct. Consequently, comparisons of the form ai = aj are

useless, which means that we can assume that no comparisons for exact

equality occur. Moreover, the comparisons ai aj, ai aj, ai > aj, and ai
< aj are all equivalent in that they yield identical information about the
relative order of ai and aj. We therefore assume that all comparisons
have the form ai aj.

Figure 8.1 The decision tree for insertion sort operating on three elements. An internal node

(shown in blue) annotated by i : j indicates a comparison between ai and aj. A leaf annotated
by the permutation (1), (2), ... , (n) indicates the ordering a(1) a(2) a(n). The
highlighted path indicates the decisions made when sorting the input sequence a1 = 6, a2 = 8,
a3 = 5. Going left from the root node, labeled 1:2, indicates that a1 a2. Going right from the
node labeled 2:3 indicates that a2 > a3. Going right from the node labeled 1:3 indicates that a1
> a3. Therefore, we have the ordering a3 a1 a2, as indicated in the leaf labeled 3, 1, 2.

Because the three input elements have 3! = 6 possible permutations, the decision tree must
have at least 6 leaves.

The decision-tree model
We can view comparison sorts abstractly in terms of decision trees. A

decision tree is a full binary tree (each node is either a leaf or has both

children) that represents the comparisons between elements that are

performed by a particular sorting algorithm operating on an input of a
given size. Control, data movement, and all other aspects of the
algorithm are ignored. Figure 8.1 shows the decision tree corresponding
to the insertion sort algorithm from Section 2.1 operating on an input
sequence of three elements.

A decision tree has each internal node annotated by i : j for some i
and j in the range 1 i, j n, where n is the number of elements in the
input sequence. We also annotate each leaf by a permutation (1), (2),
... , (n). (See Section C.1 for background on permutations.) Indices in

the internal nodes and the leaves always refer to the original positions
of the array elements at the start of the sorting algorithm. The
execution of the comparison sorting algorithm corresponds to tracing a
simple path from the root of the decision tree down to a leaf. Each

internal node indicates a comparison ai aj. The left subtree then
dictates subsequent comparisons once we know that ai aj, and the
right subtree dictates subsequent comparisons when ai > aj. Arriving at
a leaf, the sorting algorithm has established the ordering a(1) a(2)
a(n). Because any correct sorting algorithm must be able to
produce each permutation of its input, each of the n! permutations on n

elements must appear as at least one of the leaves of the decision tree
for a comparison sort to be correct. Furthermore, each of these leaves
must be reachable from the root by a downward path corresponding to
an actual execution of the comparison sort. (We call such leaves
"reachable.") Thus, we consider only decision trees in which each
permutation appears as a reachable leaf.

A lower bound for the worst case

The length of the longest simple path from the root of a decision tree to
any of its reachable leaves represents the worst-case number of
comparisons that the corresponding sorting algorithm performs.
Consequently, the worst-case number of comparisons for a given
comparison sort algorithm equals the height of its decision tree. A
lower bound on the heights of all decision trees in which each
permutation appears as a reachable leaf is therefore a lower bound on

the running time of any comparison sort algorithm. The following
theorem establishes such a lower bound.

Theorem 8.1
Any comparison sort algorithm requires (n lg n) comparisons in the

worst case.

Proof From the preceding discussion, it suffices to determine the

height of a decision tree in which each permutation appears as a

reachable leaf. Consider a decision tree of height h with l reachable
leaves corresponding to a comparison sort on n elements. Because each
of the n! permutations of the input appears as one or more leaves, we
have n! l. Since a binary tree of height h has no more than 2h leaves,

we have

n! l 2h,

which, by taking logarithms, implies

h lg(n!) (since the lg function is monotonically increasing)
= (n lg n) (by equation (3.28) on page 67).

Corollary 8.2

Heapsort and merge sort are asymptotically optimal comparison sorts.

Proof The O(n lg n) upper bounds on the running times for heapsort
and merge sort match the (n lg n) worst-case lower bound from

Theorem 8.1.

Exercises

8.1-1

What is the smallest possible depth of a leaf in a decision tree for a
comparison sort?

8.1-2

Obtain asymptotically tight bounds on lg(n!) without using Stirling's

approximation. Instead, evaluate the summation using

techniques from Section A.2.

8.1-3

Show that there is no comparison sort whose running time is linear for

at least half of the n! inputs of length n. What about a fraction of 1/n of
the inputs of length n? What about a fraction 1/2n?

8.1-4
You are given an n-element input sequence, and you know in advance

that it is partly sorted in the following sense. Each element initially in

position i such that i mod 4 = 0 is either already in its correct position,

or it is one place away from its correct position. For example, you know

that after sorting, the element initially in position 12 belongs in position

11, 12, or 13. You have no advance information about the other

elements, in positions i where i mod 4 0. Show that an (n lg n) lower

bound on comparison-based sorting still holds in this case.