8.3 Radix sort

Radix sort is the algorithm used by the card-sorting machines you now

find only in computer museums. The cards have 80 columns, and in
each column a machine can punch a hole in one of 12 places. The sorter
can be mechanically "programmed" to examine a given column of each
card in a deck and distribute the card into one of 12 bins depending on
which place has been punched. An operator can then gather the cards
bin by bin, so that cards with the first place punched are on top of
cards with the second place punched, and so on.

Figure 8.3 The operation of radix sort on seven 3-digit numbers. The leftmost column is the
input. The remaining columns show the numbers after successive sorts on increasingly
significant digit positions. Tan shading indicates the digit position sorted on to produce each
list from the previous one.

For decimal digits, each column uses only 10 places. (The other two

places are reserved for encoding nonnumeric characters.) A d-digit
number occupies a field of d columns. Since the card sorter can look at
only one column at a time, the problem of sorting n cards on a d-digit

number requires a sorting algorithm.

Intuitively, you might sort numbers on their most significant

(leftmost) digit, sort each of the resulting bins recursively, and then
combine the decks in order. Unfortunately, since the cards in 9 of the 10
bins must be put aside to sort each of the bins, this procedure generates
many intermediate piles of cards that you would have to keep track of.
(See Exercise 8.3-6.)

Radix sort solves the problem of card sorting--counterintuitively--

by sorting on the least significant digit first. The algorithm then

combines the cards into a single deck, with the cards in the 0 bin
preceding the cards in the 1 bin preceding the cards in the 2 bin, and so
on. Then it sorts the entire deck again on the second-least significant
digit and recombines the deck in a like manner. The process continues

until the cards have been sorted on all d digits. Remarkably, at that
point the cards are fully sorted on the d-digit number. Thus, only d

passes through the deck are required to sort. Figure 8.3 shows how
radix sort operates on a "deck" of seven 3-digit numbers.

In order for radix sort to work correctly, the digit sorts must be
stable. The sort performed by a card sorter is stable, but the operator
must be careful not to change the order of the cards as they come out

of a bin, even though all the cards in a bin have the same digit in the
chosen column.

In a typical computer, which is a sequential random-access machine,
we sometimes use radix sort to sort records of information that are
keyed by multiple fields. For example, we might wish to sort dates by
three keys: year, month, and day. We could run a sorting algorithm with
a comparison function that, given two dates, compares years, and if
there is a tie, compares months, and if another tie occurs, compares
days. Alternatively, we could sort the information three times with a
stable sort: first on day (the "least significant" part), next on month,
and finally on year.

The code for radix sort is straightforward. The RADIX-SORT

procedure assumes that each element in array A[1 : n] has d digits, where
digit 1 is the lowest-order digit and digit d is the highest-order digit.

RADIX-SORT(A, n, d)

1 for i = 1 to d
2 use a stable sort to sort array A[1 : n] on

digit i

Although the pseudocode for RADIX-SORT does not specify which
stable sort to use, COUNTING-SORT is commonly used. If you use
COUNTING-SORT as the stable sort, you can make RADIX-SORT a
little more efficient by revising COUNTING-SORT to take a pointer to
the output array as a parameter, having RADIX-SORT preallocate this
array, and alternating input and output between the two arrays in
successive iterations of the for loop in RADIX-SORT.

Lemma 8.3
Given n d-digit numbers in which each digit can take on up to k possible
values, RADIX-SORT correctly sorts these numbers in (d(n + k)) time
if the stable sort it uses takes (n + k) time.

Proof The correctness of radix sort follows by induction on the

column being sorted (see Exercise 8.3-3). The analysis of the running

time depends on the stable sort used as the intermediate sorting

algorithm. When each digit lies in the range 0 to k 1 (so that it can
take on k possible values), and k is not too large, counting sort is the
obvious choice. Each pass over n d-digit numbers then takes (n + k)
time. There are d passes, and so the total time for radix sort is (d(n +
k)).

When d is constant and k = O(n), we can make radix sort run in

linear time. More generally, we have some flexibility in how to break
each key into digits.

Lemma 8.4
Given n b-bit numbers and any positive integer r b, RADIX-SORT
correctly sorts these numbers in ((b/r)(n + 2r)) time if the stable sort it
uses takes (n + k) time for inputs in the range 0 to k.

Proof For a value r b, view each key as having d = b/r digits of r
bits each. Each digit is an integer in the range 0 to 2r 1, so that we can
use counting sort with k = 2r 1. (For example, we can view a 32-bit
word as having four 8-bit digits, so that b = 32, r = 8, k = 2r 1 = 255,
and d = b/r = 4.) Each pass of counting sort takes (n + k) = (n + 2r)
time and there are d passes, for a total running time of (d(n + 2r)) =
((b/r)(n + 2r)).

Given n and b, what value of r b minimizes the expression (b/r)(n +
2r)? As r decreases, the factor b/r increases, but as r increases so does
2r. The answer depends on whether b < lg n. If b < lg n, then r b
implies (n + 2r) = (n). Thus, choosing r = b yields a running time of
(b/b)(n + 2b) = (n), which is asymptotically optimal. If b lg n, then
choosing r = lg n gives the best running time to within a constant
factor, which we can see as follows.1 Choosing r = lg n yields a

running time of (bn/lg n). As r increases above lg n, the 2r term in
the numerator increases faster than the r term in the denominator, and
so increasing r above lg n yields a running time of (bn / lg n). If
instead r were to decrease below lg n, then the b/r term increases and
the n + 2r term remains at (n).

Is radix sort preferable to a comparison-based sorting algorithm,

such as quicksort? If b = O(lg n), as is often the case, and r lg n, then
radix sort's running time is (n), which appears to be better than
quicksort's expected running time of (n lg n). The constant factors

hidden in the -notation differ, however. Although radix sort may make

fewer passes than quicksort over the n keys, each pass of radix sort may

take significantly longer. Which sorting algorithm to prefer depends on
the characteristics of the implementations, of the underlying machine
(e.g., quicksort often uses hardware caches more effectively than radix
sort), and of the input data. Moreover, the version of radix sort that
uses counting sort as the intermediate stable sort does not sort in place,

which many of the (n lg n)-time comparison sorts do. Thus, when

primary memory storage is at a premium, an in-place algorithm such as
quicksort could be the better choice.

Exercises

8.3-1

Using Figure 8.3 as a model, illustrate the operation of RADIX-SORT
on the following list of English words: COW, DOG, SEA, RUG, ROW,
MOB, BOX, TAB, BAR, EAR, TAR, DIG, BIG, TEA, NOW, FOX.

8.3-2

Which of the following sorting algorithms are stable: insertion sort,
merge sort, heapsort, and quicksort? Give a simple scheme that makes
any comparison sort stable. How much additional time and space does
your scheme entail?

8.3-3

Use induction to prove that radix sort works. Where does your proof
need the assumption that the intermediate sort is stable?

8.3-4

Suppose that COUNTING-SORT is used as the stable sort within

RADIX-SORT. If RADIX-SORT calls COUNTING-SORT d times,

then since each call of COUNTING-SORT makes two passes over the

data (lines 45 and 1113), altogether 2d passes over the data occur.
Describe how to reduce the total number of passes to d + 1.

8.3-5
Show how to sort n integers in the range 0 to n3 1 in O(n) time.

8.3-6

In the first card-sorting algorithm in this section, which sorts on the
most significant digit first, exactly how many sorting passes are needed

to sort d-digit decimal numbers in the worst case? How many piles of

cards does an operator need to keep track of in the worst case?