9.1 Minimum and maximum

How many comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum of a

set of n elements? To obtain an upper bound of n 1 comparisons, just

examine each element of the set in turn and keep track of the smallest
element seen so far. The MINIMUM procedure assumes that the set

resides in array A[1 : n].

MINIMUM(A, n)

1 min = A[1]

2 for i = 2 to n

3 if min > A[i]

4 min = A[i]

5 return min

It's no more difficult to find the maximum with n 1 comparisons.

Is this algorithm for minimum the best we can do? Yes, because it

turns out that there's a lower bound of n 1 comparisons for the

problem of determining the minimum. Think of any algorithm that
determines the minimum as a tournament among the elements. Each
comparison is a match in the tournament in which the smaller of the
two elements wins. Since every element except the winner must lose at

least one match, we can conclude that n 1 comparisons are necessary

to determine the minimum. Hence the algorithm MINIMUM is optimal
with respect to the number of comparisons performed.

Simultaneous minimum and maximum

Some applications need to find both the minimum and the maximum of

a set of n elements. For example, a graphics program may need to scale
a set of (x, y) data to fit onto a rectangular display screen or other

graphical output device. To do so, the program must first determine the
minimum and maximum value of each coordinate.

Of course, we can determine both the minimum and the maximum of

n elements using (n) comparisons. We simply find the minimum and
maximum independently, using n 1 comparisons for each, for a total
of 2n 2 = (n) comparisons.

Although 2n 2 comparisons is asymptotically optimal, it is possible

to improve the leading constant. We can find both the minimum and the

maximum using at most 3 n/2 comparisons. The trick is to maintain

both the minimum and maximum elements seen thus far. Rather than
processing each element of the input by comparing it against the
current minimum and maximum, at a cost of 2 comparisons per
element, process elements in pairs. Compare pairs of elements from the

input first with each other, and then compare the smaller with the

current minimum and the larger to the current maximum, at a cost of 3
comparisons for every 2 elements.

How you set up initial values for the current minimum and maximum

depends on whether n is odd or even. If n is odd, set both the minimum

and maximum to the value of the first element, and then process the

rest of the elements in pairs. If n is even, perform 1 comparison on the

first 2 elements to determine the initial values of the minimum and
maximum, and then process the rest of the elements in pairs as in the

case for odd n.
Let's count the total number of comparisons. If n is odd, then 3 n/2

comparisons occur. If n is even, 1 initial comparison occurs, followed by
another 3(n 2)/2 comparisons, for a total of 3n/2 2. Thus, in either
case, the total number of comparisons is at most 3 n/2.

Exercises

9.1-1

Show that the second smallest of n elements can be found with n + lg
n 2 comparisons in the worst case. (Hint: Also find the smallest

element.)

9.1-2
Given n > 2 distinct numbers, you want to find a number that is neither

the minimum nor the maximum. What is the smallest number of
comparisons that you need to perform?

9.1-3

A racetrack can run races with five horses at a time to determine their
relative speeds. For 25 horses, it takes six races to determine the fastest
horse, assuming transitivity (see page 1159). What's the minimum
number of races it takes to determine the fastest three horses out of 25?

9.1-4
Prove the lower bound of 3n/2 2 comparisons in the worst case to
find both the maximum and minimum of n numbers. (Hint: Consider

how many numbers are potentially either the maximum or minimum,
and investigate how a comparison affects these counts.)